+++
nid = "2565"
uid = "115"
author = "Darrell Donakowski"
title = "ANES Announcement: : Deadlines for the ANES 2010-2012 EGSS Online Commons Proposals"
tags = [ "Social Science Datasets",]
oldpath = "/blog/anes-announcement-deadlines-anes-2010-2012-egss-online-commons-proposals"
date = "2011-07-15 08:07:59 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
The American National Election Studies are continuing to accept
proposals for the ANES 2010-2012 Evaluations of Government and Society
Study. The deadline to submit proposals for EGSS 4 is 3:00p.m. EDT,
August 30, 2011. The deadline for members of the Online Commons
community to comment on proposals is September 8, 2011. The deadline for
revisions to proposals is at 3:00p.m. EDT on September 14, 2011. For
additional information about how to submit a proposal, please visit:
<http://www.electionstudies.org/>

Proposals may be submitted through the ANES Online Commons. The
following describes the goals of this study and proposal process.

About The 2010-2012 Evaluations of Government and Society Study

The overarching theme of the surveys is citizen attitudes about
government and society. These Internet surveys represent the most
cost-effective way for the ANES user community to gauge political
perceptions during one of the most momentous periods in American
history. Aside from the historic nature of the current administration
and the almost unprecedented economic crisis facing the country, we
believe it is imperative that researchers assess attitudes about
politics and society in the period leading up to the 2012 national
elections. Potential topics include: attitudes about the performance of
the Obama administration on the major issues of the day, evaluations of
Congress and the Supreme Court, identification with and attitudes about
the major political parties, and levels of interest in and engagement
with national politics. This is primarily because these perceptions are
unmistakably correlated with both presidential vote choice and levels of
political participation. We intend to measure each of these topics at
multiple points throughout the two-year period preceding the

2012 elections. In addition to these subjects, we envision that each of
these surveys would explore a particular aspect of these political
perceptions.

This Study includes five rolling cross-section surveys that will allow
us the opportunity to pilot new items for possible inclusion on the 2012
time series. Proposals for the first three surveys of the study were
accepted earlier this year. The first survey of the study was conducted
in October 2010; the second survey was conducted in the Spring of 2011.
The third survey will be in the field later this year. We are currently
accepting proposals for the final two surveys of the study. The fourth
survey will be conducted in early 2012 and the final survey will be in
the field in the middle of 2012. For the timelines and deadlines for the
remaining surveys, please see
<http://electionstudies.org/studypages/2010_2012EGSS/2010_2012EGSScalendar.htm>

By offering multiple opportunities for the user community to place their
items on one or more surveys, we are providing the capacity to survey on
a diverse set of topics that are relevant to a wide set of research
communities. Lastly, the flexibility of these surveys as to both content
and timing will allow the ANES to respond promptly to emerging political
issues in this volatile period in our country's history.

About the Online Commons

The design of the questionnaires for The 2010-2012 Evaluations of
Government and Society Study will evolve from proposals and comments
submitted to the Online Commons (OC). The OC is an online system
designed to promote communication among scholars and to yield innovative
proposals about the most effective ways to measure electorally-relevant
concepts and relationships. The goal of the OC is to improve the quality
and scientific value of ANES data collections, to encourage the
submission of new ideas, and to make such experiences more beneficial to
and enjoyable for investigators. In the last study cycle, more than 700
scholars sent over 200 proposals through the Online Commons.

Proposals for the inclusion of questions must include clear theoretical
and empirical rationales. All proposals must also clearly state how the
questions will increase the value of the respective studies. In
particular, proposed questions must have the potential to help scholars
understand the causes and/or consequences of turnout or candidate
choice.

For more information about the criteria that will be used to evaluate
proposals, please see
<http://www.electionstudies.org/studypages/2010_2012EGSS/2010_2012EGSScriteria.htm>

For additional information on how to submit a proposal, please see
<http://www.electionstudies.org/onlinecommons/proposalsubmit.htm>
