+++
nid = "2564"
uid = "115"
author = "Darrell Donakowski"
title = "ANES Announcement: The ANES 2012 Time Series Study"
tags = [ "United States", "Social Science Datasets", "News and Announcements",]
oldpath = "/blog/anes-announcement-anes-2012-time-series-study"
date = "2011-07-15 08:05:47 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
On June 30, 2011, the American National Election Studies (ANES) began
accepting proposals for questions to include on the ANES 2012 Time
Series Study.  Proposals may be submitted through the ANES Online
Commons. The following describes the goals of this study and the
opportunity to include questions on it.

About The ANES 2012 Time Series Study

The ANES's core mission is to promote cutting-edge and
broadly-collaborative research on American national elections. The heart
of the ANES is its presidential year time series surveys. The time
series legacy is well known, serving as a model for election studies
around the world and having generated thousands of publications. Every
four years, a large representative sample of American adults has been
interviewed on two occasions, first between Labor Day and Election Day,
and again between Election Day and the onset of the winter holidays. The
two face-to-face interviews will last approximately one hour each in
2012. Pre-election interviews focus on candidate preferences and
anticipated vote choice; an array of possible predictors of candidate
preferences, turnout, citizen engagement; and an array of indicators of
cognitive and behavioral engagement in the information flow of the
campaign. Post-election interviews measures a variety of behavioral
experiences people might have had throughout the campaign (e.g.,
turnout, mobilization efforts), plus additional posited predictors of
candidate preferences, turnout, and citizen engagement.

Some of the questions asked during these interviews are categorized as
standard (also known as core) items, meaning that they have been asked
regularly over the years.  These questions are scheduled to appear on
subsequent editions of the ANES Time Series in order to permit
comparisons across elections.  The purpose of categorizing items as
standard is to assure scholars who conduct longitudinal analyses that
they can continue to depend on ANES to include variables that have been
shown to perform well in the past.

Although recognizing the importance of continuity, ANES has also sought
to develop the time series in innovative ways. The non-standard
component of each questionnaire has routinely focused on matters of
interest to the current election cycle. These items are often selected
from an "ANES Question Inventory," which includes the standard
questions and questions that have been asked in past ANES surveys but
are not part of the standard battery of questions.  Researchers can
access the question inventory at:

<ftp://ftp.electionstudies.org/ftp/anes/OC/CoreUtility/ALT2010core.htm>

The non-standard content of questionnaires has varied over the years.
For example, candidate positions on issues of government policy are
recognized as predictors of candidate preferences, but two one-hour
interviews do not permit measuring positions on all of the many issues
enjoying government attention at any one time in history. So from year
to year, different choices have been made about which issues to include
in the questionnaire.

As in the past, ANES will continue to emphasize best practices in sample
design, respondent recruitment, and interviewing.  As always, we aim to
provide top-quality service in many respects, including: (1) the careful
and extensive planning that must be done before the field work begins,
(2) the hard work that will be done by interviewers, supervisors, and
study managers during data collection to monitor productivity and make
adjustments in strategy to maximize the quality of the final product,
and (3) the extensive data processing efforts (including integration of
an extensive contextual data file) that will be required to assemble and
document the final data set.

 

About the Online Commons

Content for the ANES 2012 Time Series Study will primarily evolve from
two sources:  previous ANES Time Series questionnaires and new proposals
received via the ANES Online Commons (OC).  The OC is an Internet-based
system designed to promote communication among scholars and to yield
innovative proposals about the most effective ways to measure
electorally-relevant concepts and relationships. The goal of the OC is
to improve the quality and scientific value of ANES data collections, to
encourage the submission of new ideas, and to make such experiences more
beneficial to and enjoyable for investigators. In the last study cycle,
more than 700 scholars sent over 200 proposals through the OC.

Proposals for the inclusion of questions must include clear theoretical
and empirical rationales. All proposals must also clearly state how the
questions will increase the value of the respective studies. In
particular, proposed questions must have the potential to help scholars
understand the causes and/or consequences of turnout or candidate
choice.

The ANES Online Commons will accept proposals until 3:00pm Eastern Time
on August 30, 2011. The deadline for members of the Online Commons
community to comment on proposals is September 8, 2011. The deadline for
revisions to proposals is at 3:00pm Eastern Time on September 14, 2011.

For additional information about how to submit a proposal, please visit:

<http://www.electionstudies.org/>

 

Proposal Evaluation Criteria

The following criteria will guide the PIs and the ANES Board in
evaluating proposals made through the Online Commons. We strongly
encourage anyone who is considering making a proposal to read the
following carefully.

1. Problem-Relevant. Are the theoretical motivations, proposed concepts
and survey items relevant to ongoing controversies among researchers?
How will the data that the proposers expect to observe advance the
debate?

What specific analyses of the data will be performed? What might these
analyses reveal? How would these findings be relevant to specific
questions or controversies?

2. Suitability to ANES. The primary mission of the ANES is to advance
our understanding of voter choice and electoral participation. Ceteris
paribus, concepts and instrumentation that are relevant to our
understanding of these phenomena will be considered more favorably than
items tapping other facets of politics, public opinion, American culture
or society.

3. Building on Solid Theoretical Footing. Does the proposed
instrumentation follow from a plausible theory of political behavior?

4. Demonstrated Validity and Reliability of Proposed Items. Proposed
items should be accompanied by evidence demonstrating their validity and
reliability. Validity has various facets: e.g., construct validity,
concurrent validity, discriminant validity and predictive validity. Any
assessment of predictive validity should keep in mind criterion 2,
above.

Reliability can be demonstrated in various ways; one example is
test-retest reliability. We understand that proposals for novel concepts
and/or instrumentation will almost always lack empirical evidence
demonstrating validity and/or reliability. Proposals for truly "novel"
instrumentation might be best suited for the series of smaller,
cross-sectional studies ANES will field in the period 2010 through the
summer of 2012; as a general matter, we are highly unlikely to field
untested instrumentation on the Fall 2012 pre-election and post-election
surveys.

5. Breadth of Relevance and Generalizability. Will the research that
results from the proposed instrumentation be useful to many scholars?

Given the broad usage of ANES data, we may be unable to accommodate
requests to include items that are relevant for one -or only a few-
hypothesis tests. Ceteris paribus, items that are potentially relevant
for a wide range of analyses will be considered more favorably than
items that would seem to have less applicability.

When the 2012 questionnaires are designed, the status of the standard
questions will be central considerations. Standard questions do not have
an infinite shelf life -- Science advances and new insights can reveal
more effective ways of asking important questions or can show that some
questions do not in fact meet the requirements of remaining a standard
question.  However, proposed changes made to standard questions will be
scrutinized with recognition of the value of continuity over time. 
While we will welcome proposals to change standard questions, the burden
of proof required for making such changes will be high. We will take
most seriously arguments that are backed by concrete evidence and strong
theory.

All proposals that include a change to a particular question (standard
or non-standard) should name the specific question that would be altered
and provide a full explanation as to why the ANES user community will
benefit by such a change.

Tools To Assist Your Proposal Development

As previously mentioned, researchers can access the ANES Question
Inventory at:

<ftp://ftp.electionstudies.org/ftp/anes/OC/CoreUtility/ALT2010core.htm>

This Inventory provides the list of standard and non-standard questions
that have been part of the Time Series, and includes frequencies for the
most recent studies.

We have also created a second resource to review questions that have
been asked previously.  The ANES Time Series Codebook Search utility
searches existing codebooks from studies in the ANES Time Series.   You
can access the utility at
<http://ftp.nes.isr.umich.edu/backup/searchhelp.htm>  

(Please note that there are some limitations to the utility that are
documented on the search help page, the link to that page is at the top
of the utility page.)

We hope that you will find these tools useful as you prepare your
proposals.

The opportunity to submit proposals is open to anyone who wants to make
a constructive contribution to the development of the ANES 2012 Time
Series Study. Feel free to pass this invitation along to anyone (e.g.,
your colleagues and students) who you think might be interested. We hope
to hear from you.

For additional resources and information on how to submit a proposal,
please visit <http://www.electionstudies.org/onlinecommons/>

 

Darrell Donakowski

Director of Studies

American National Election Studies (ANES)
