+++
nid = "6385"
uid = "765"
author = "LHorton 2"
title = "\"Before anything else, preparation is the key to success.\" Notes from RDMF13: Preparing Data for Deposit"
tags = [ "Research Data Management",]
oldpath = "/blog/anything-else-preparation-key-success-notes-rdmf13-preparing-data-deposit"
date = "2015-05-01 08:59:18 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
The Digital Curation Centre's most recent Research Data Management Forum
took place last week in London.

UK Data Service's Louise Corti began the day with an overview of their
acquisitions process. The Service (under various names) is almost 50
years old that gives it experience and perspective many institutions do
not have. Lessons from those years include the importance of a
collections development policy that's allowed to evolve. The Archive
evaluates on a basis of teaching and re-use for validation and
replication. They have learnt from past mistakes and now keep access
licences to three options: open, safeguarded (requiring registration),
and controlled (locked-down access). Common problems persist however.
Poor file names, weak description of methods and contextual
documentation, limited metadata, and unexplained missing data files. The
UK Data Service play a number of roles as a data service, from
hand-holders and evangelical preachers, to being the Economic and Social
Research Council's police officer for non-compliance on data sharing.

Suzanne Embury made a valuable point in her presentation. Of course, the
one thing we know is we don't know how other people will re-use data in
the future. But we can reasonably guess what they will want to do is
discover, integrate, and aggregate it. To this end, simple things can
help -- check spellings, aim for standardised vocabularies, avoid
acronyms. Finally, apply a domain expert test to see if people in the
discipline can independently understand the data. With that, echoes of
Gary King's [replication
standard](http://gking.harvard.edu/files/gking/files/replication.pdf)
came to mind.

A presentation on meeting the RDM challenge focused on the University of
Loughborough who have adopted a data preservation and sharing solution
based on [figshare](http://figshare.com/) and
[Arkivum](http://arkivum.com/) support. Loughborough desire making
depositing data as easy as possible for researchers by taking care of as
much of back end stuff as possible. But at what cost, in both finances
and quality? At the last IASSIST we learnt RDM [takes a
village](http://www.iassistdata.org/downloads/2014/2014_2h_hofelichmohr_etal.pdf),
but Loughborough acknowledged the contribution of 61 people in setting
up their service, so maybe it really takes a small metropolitan
statistical area.

IASSIST's own web editor Robin Rice directed us through data deposit at
the University of Edinburgh guided by former IASSIST president Peter
Burnhill's refrain of "helping researchers to do the right thing".
Edinburgh provide support throughout the data lifecycle with strong
training resources ([Research Data
MANTRA](http://datalib.edina.ac.uk/mantra/)), plus face-to-face sessions
on managing data, creating DMP, good practice, handling data in SPSS,
working with personal and sensitive research data. Like the UK Data
Service, they recognise the value in keeping things simple and offering
good incentives. Licence options, for example. Their repository only
accepts open data (CC-BY 4.0) but depositing is based on five required
metadata fields. In return, depositors get their data available quickly
with open download stats for every item.

The afternoon sessions split into three discussion groups. Emerging from
them were thoughts on keeping metadata requirements as simple as
possible, recognising the concentrate on different aspects depending on
the discipline; some disciplines require precision while others do not
require so much. An acknowledgement that data discovery is often
undertaken through google. Also, while there inevitably is a range of
people providing a service, there needs to be or a person connecting
existing resources in a university. Finally, raising awareness is a
problem, demand related to institutional awareness.

[Presentations](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/events/research-data-management-forum-rdmf/rdmf13-preparing-data-deposit)
from the event are available from the DCC, and tweets with the hashtag
[#rdmf13](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23rdmf13). The DCC will be
blogging about the discussion group sessions.
