+++
nid = "6408"
uid = "186"
author = "lyndamk"
title = "Brief IASSIST conference wrap up"
tags = [ "IASSIST 2015",]
oldpath = "/blog/brief-iassist-conference-wrap"
date = "2015-06-19 11:41:14 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
These are my brief notes from the sessions I was able to attend and take
notes (a few times I was unable to stay in a session because of
questions elsewhere). I would suggest looking at the [twitter
feed](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23iassist15&src=typd) if you are
interested. We had a new member taking sketch notes during the
conference, which were quite popular. Also Laurence Horton from LSE
took [very detailed Google Doc
notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Jmo5AwA0N7OXmkYGOMmOc_qveMjVZsU0itgkM5xMl0/edit) and
wrote a [great blog
post](http://iassistdata.org/blog/iassist-2015-blog-post-data-librarian-minneapolis).

Day 1 kicked off with a fantastic plenary by **Steve Ruggles** from the
conference host, [Minnesota Population
Center](https://www.pop.umn.edu/) (MPC). His talk focused on the
development of the Census over time. His main argument was that the
Census Bureau (CB) played a tremendous role in developing innovative
technology and data collection methods during the early years through
the mid-twentieth century, but that the more recent Census years have
seen stagnation and a loss in the CB's leadership. While depressing at
points, Ruggles highlighted a few collaborations between the CB and the
MPC that are promising such as the Census Longitudinal Infrastructure
Project (CLIP).

I chaired a session entitled [Training Data
Users](http://iassist2015.pop.umn.edu/program/block1#a4). King-Hele
discussed training efforts at the [UK Data
Archive](http://www.data-archive.ac.uk/). Primarily they have
concentrated on in-person workshops, but they have also started creating
webinars and [training
guides/videos](http://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk/use-data/tutorials.aspx).
I'm looking forward to checking some of these out during my summer!
Katharin Peter at the Univ of Southern California talked about
supporting data-related assignments. Her univ had a competitive grant
program for faculty to encourage the creation of these assignments in
conjunction with instructional designers and Katharin as the data
librarian. Although USC was able to offer significant grant amounts, I
think faculty could be encouraged with much lower amounts at other
schools. Another incentive could be the creation of communities of
practice where faculty can share and learn. They will eventually create
a repository of data assignments but that is in the early stages.
Finally Kristin Eschenfelder and her team from Univ of Wisconsin (Go
Badgers!) closed out our session.  They used the IASSIST
journal, *IQ, *to analyze connections between Social Science Data
Archives over time. Using historical network analysis they were able to
track the interactions between the different archives and funding
agencies. It is a really interesting project and I can't wait to see
where they go with more data. They were also part of our new paper track
and were required to [submit a paper in
advance](http://iassist2015.pop.umn.edu/paper-submissions), which anyone
can access. They also won the first paper award prize.

The plenary for day 2 was a bit controversial, but we meant it that way.
We had Curtiss Cobb, head of the Population and Survey Sciences Team at
Facebook, talk about Facebook's interest in the digital divide in the
developing world and its
initiative [Internet.org](https://internet.org/). They have also been
acquiring third party data to inform their research, so Curtiss
discussed his evaluative framework for acquiring data. Again, Laurence
has [more notes on the specifics of the
talk](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Jmo5AwA0N7OXmkYGOMmOc_qveMjVZsU0itgkM5xMl0/edit).
While there were questions about Facebook's "altruistic" intentions,
I enjoyed having an outside perspective on social science data and its
use.

I also attended a fabulous session with the [Minnesota Population
Center](https://www.pop.umn.edu/) on their various data programs. So
much goodness in this one. They talked about their products from the old
standbys
like [IPUMS-USA](https://usa.ipums.org/usa/) and [IPUMS-International](https://international.ipums.org/international/) to
newer products like [Terra Populus](http://www.terrapop.org/), which
integrates environmental and population data. The one I am really
excited about for my history graduate work and haven't used much is
the [North Atlantic Population Project](http://www.nappdata.org/). With
our Atlantic World focus at UNCG, it seems that this could be popular.

One of my favorite sessions brought together [geospatial data and
qualitative data
specialists](http://iassist2015.pop.umn.edu/program/block5#a1), two
areas that are increasingly popular in libraries. Andy
Rutkowski formerly of USC talked about combining GIS methods with
qualitative data especially archival information. It was a really nice
discussion of the more theoretical aspects of these techniques. In
addition, Mandy Swygart-Hobaugh talked about her analysis of job
postings related to qualitative data support in libraries. She found
that it is an under-supported area. You can read more about her project
soon in the edited volume *Databrarianship: The Academic Data Librarian
In Theory And Practice, *coming to a library near you in Fall(ish) 2015.

The last session I could attend was [Training Data Users
II](http://iassist2015.pop.umn.edu/program/block6#a1). ** **David Fearon
and Jennifer Darragh from Johns Hopkins talked about training for
de-identifying human subjects in data sets. This is a really cool and
extremely specialized service, but one that I am sure lots of faculty
would welcome with the new sharing requirements. They developed their
workshop information from a training session offered by ICPSR. They have
some handouts, but I couldn't get the URL down in time. I will add when
it is available.

Finally, we closed out with a plenary talk by [Andrew
Johnson](http://www.ci.minneapolis.mn.us/ward12/) (no, not that Andrew
Johnson) on *Politics of Open Data*. He is a city council ward
representative for Minneapolis and was one of the creators of [What We
Pay For](http://whatwepayfor.com/), a website that tracks federal
government spending and connects your salary to actual government
expenditures. He talked about his interest in providing open data access
and the political roadblocks he encountered along the way. Great way to
end a conference all about data!

The presentation, poster, and pecha kucha PowerPoints are being
collected now. We will make them available as possible, but
unfortunately there may be a delay. If you are interested in any
particular presentation, get in touch with me and I can send you more
information. Overall it was definitely the best IASSIST ever.
