+++
nid = "583"
uid = "12"
author = "Ann"
title = "Conceptualizing the Digital Life Cycle"
tags = [ "IASSIST Conferences", "IASSIST 2006"]
oldpath = "/blog/conceptualizing-digital-life-cycle"
date = "2006-06-01 20:49:41 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/ticklifecycle.jpg"
+++
The **Digital Life Cycle** was mentioned many times during the IASSIST
2006 conference. Reaction toward this concept was varied. Some were
unsure they liked this idea claiming that the life cycle was a confusing
or imperfect metaphor. Others applied a very exact meaning to the
concept associating it to the stages through which information passes
within a system or large process. The Session that I chaired on
Institutional Repositories and Social Science Data: Supporting the Data
Life Cycle (B1) provided different visual representations of the digital
life cycle. I'm including three diagrams with different takes on the
life cycle that together offer an overview of some of the discussion
about this concept. 

*Click on the images to display a larger version.*

[![Image of the Life Cycle of the Tick](/img/blog/ticklifecycleB.gif)](/img/blog/ticklifecycle.jpg)

The first diagram is a life cycle model from another discipline and
represents the relationship between ticks and their hosts, where hosts
play a role in providing supporting environments throughout the life
cycle of a particular tick species. As a metaphor, digital objects can
be viewed as ticks that are moved from one host to the next where the
host serves as the digital object's environment. Source: EUCALB
1997-2005. European Union Concerted Action on Lyme Borreliosis. Image
courtesy of Dr. Jeremy Gray and Bernard Kaye.
<http://www.oeghmp.at/eucalb/biology_the-tick-life-cycle.html>

[![Image of the DDI Life Cycle](/img/blog/DDIlifecycleB.gif)](/img/blog/DDIlifecycle.jpg)

The second diagram provides a representation of Version 3 of the DDI.
This version was designed to encompass the life cycle of data with each
stage articulating part of the process through which data are generated,
transformed, analyzed and re-used. Source: DDI Alliance. "DDI Version 3
Conceptual Model" (draft 2004) [http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DDI/committee-info/Concept-Model-WD.pdf](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DDI/committee-info/Concept-Model-WD.pdf).

[![Image of the E-science Research Life Cycle](/img/blog/esciencelifecycleB.gif)](/img/blog/esciencelifecycle.jpg)

The
third life cycle view, articulated by Chuck Humphrey, builds upon the
DDI Version 3 model and incorporates a Knowledge Transfer Cycle as a
distinct stage within the research cycle. The data life cycle occurs
throughout the stages of the research cycle. Source: Humphrey, Charles.
"e-Science and the Life Cycle of Research" (2006)
[http://datalib.library.ualberta.ca/~humphrey/lifecycle-science060308.doc](http://datalib.library.ualberta.ca/%7Ehumphrey/lifecycle-science060308.doc)

What is a life cycle and why should we care? First, 'life cycle' is
different from 'life span,' that is, the time from birth to death. A
'cycle' implies an environment in which resources are managed and
preserved for discovery and repurposing. Resources are created, curated,
made accessible, and preserved for subsequent research, learning, and
policy activity. The challenge is to infuse the data life cycle with the
metadata and services that will enable access, evaluation and re-use
over time. Second, by diagramming different views of life cycles, we
have a way of bringing together ideas about the life cycle of research
programs with ideas about data resources and processes (capturing,
managing and linking data resources). Viewing the full research life
cycle allows us to identify gaps in services, technologies and
partnerships that could improve the ability to capture and document the
output of scholarly research and teaching.

 

Other diagrams have appeared in:

ICPSR Guide to Social Science Data Preparation and Archiving: Best
Practice throughout the Data Life Cycle which offers a view
"illustrating key considerations germane to archiving at each step in
the data creation process. The actual process may not be as linear as
the diagram suggests, but it is important to develop a plan to address
the archival considerations that come into play across all stages of the
data life cycle." <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/access/dataprep.pdf>

 

UKDA/ESDS offers a view of the lifecycles of datasets and the projects
that create them in Guide to Good Practice: Data Management (2005), p.
8. <http://www.esds.ac.uk/support/guides/A4.pdf>

 

Chris Rusbridge of the Digital Curation Centre pulls together a set of
life cycle diagrams in: "Information Life Cycle and Curation." (2005).
<http://www.dcc.ac.uk/docs/dcc-life-cycle.ppt>

 

Liz Lyon writes about the "concept that research and learning processes
are cyclical in nature, and that subsequent outputs which contribute to
knowledge, are based on the continuous use and reuse of data and
information." "eBank UK: Building the links between research data,
scholarly communication and learning" Ariadne, July 2003.
<http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue36/lyon/intro.html>


*Contributed by Ann Green*