+++
nid = "3776"
uid = "538"
author = "ALeahey"
title = "Data Visualization Support Roles"
tags = [ "Statistical Literacy & Training Users", "Tools, Apps, Technology",]
oldpath = "/blog/data-visualization-support-roles"
date = "2014-07-22 13:31:24 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/05-bb.png"
+++
Hello IASSISTers,

Since our last entry, the Data Visualization Working Group (DVIG) has
been connecting through email to gather information and share knowledge
about data visualization tools, best practices, teaching, and events of
interest. A major theme of conversation has been open source programming
frameworks like R statistical packages to conduct visualization.  Many
other non-programming tools have also been discussed and shared. The
question of tools is not an easy one, and there are a lot out there!

For a list of tools (not comprehensive) see: [DVIG Tool list](http://www.pearltrees.com/amberl/data-visualization-tools/id7749157%20) (opens in Pearl Trees)

*What are we doing with visualization?*

Some members are considering licensing software for their institutions,
including licensed software such as Tableau
(<http://www.tableausoftware.com/>). Others are considering adding
visualization features to existing data repositories or portals, while
others are considering these for upcoming data collections and
repository development. A discussion about the creation of a blog series
related to experiences with different repository software has been
mentioned, as well as, a list of criteria for discerning between
licensed software and repository systems. Many are concerned about the
scalability of tools and are interested in the application of
visualization techniques across disciplines and groups.

Now, there are a lot of ways to visualize data. The following diagram
describes the *process* of creating and making sense of visualizations,
and might be helpful for our discussions and understanding.

Process -- Information Workflow

![](/img/blog/05-bb.png "Workflow")

Taken from: Aisch, Gregory. Using Data Visualization to Find Insights in
Data. Data Journalism Handbook, Open Knowledge Foundation.
<http://datajournalismhandbook.org/1.0/en/understanding_data_7.html> .
2014-07-11.

Regardless of where we are at, we are all in agreement that data
visualization is COOL! And it needs support. Unfortunately the skills
needed to perform data visualization and "data wrangling" projects are
not taught widely in higher education, however, some institutions have
made strides to develop these core skills and training and others are
now developing curriculum. 

Here is a short list of current courses and teaching materials:

[University of Washington, Data
Visualization](http://courses.cs.washington.edu/courses/cse512/14wi/)
(winter 2014)

[New York University, Certificate in Data
Visualization](http://www.scps.nyu.edu/academics/departments/cada/academic-offerings/noncredit/certificate-in-analytics-and-data-visualization.html)

[Columbia University, Data
Visualization](http://www.columbia.edu/~ih2240/dataviz/)

[University of Kansas, Managing Research Data in the Social
Sciences](http://www.ipsr.ku.edu/new/AboutLAS792Summer2014.pdf) (incl
data wrangling) (summer 2014)

[University of British Columbia, Information
Visualization](http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~tmm/courses/533-11/)

[University of Toronto, Big Data
Analytics](http://2learn.utoronto.ca/uoft/search/publicCourseSearchDetails.do?method=load&cms=true&courseId=30040952&_ga=1.70030866.381144231.1404395141)
(fall 2014)

A major theme at this past IASSIST Conference was data support roles.
Data visualization topics such as R programming package, developing
library support services, teaching tools and undergraduate pedagogy,
current research, were very well attended. The IASSIST community is
engaged in Data Visualization at almost all stages of the process
workflow (see above).

*Libraries can play an important role in supporting researchers...*

Libraries serve as an ideal place on campus to support visualization for
a number of reasons. Data visualization is a truly interdisciplinary
activity seeing a growing importance in a wide variety of fields. Even
the techniques involved draw on diverse fields from statistics to
computer science to design. As such an interdisciplinary field and on
that benefits so many diverse fields, visualization has a natural home
in the library. Rather than individual disciplines developing support,
knowledge and tools for visualization these advances can be shared
across campus by making the library a central point of visualization
activities.

Furthermore, providing support for data visualization in the library can
amplify other data related activities. As libraries increasingly move to
collecting, managing and preserving complex datasets offering services
that can assist in making sense of that data will make it all the more
valuable. Moreover, visualization services provide additional
opportunities to inform researchers of support for research and data
within libraries.

*Data Viz at University of Michigan Libraries*

At the University of Michigan we are in the process of developing our
services to support visualization. Historically our support for data
visualization has developed in two different parts of the library. Both
our 3D Lab (part of our Digital Media Commons group) and our Spatial and
Numeric Data Services (SAND -- Part of the Clark Library for Maps,
Government Information and Data Services) have supported and continue to
support various types of data visualization, mapping and working with
complex types of data. In SAND, where I am located, we focus primarily
on helping researchers, students and faculty through consultations where
we teach people techniques and how to use appropriate software rather
than producing finished products. While we all have our favorite pieces
of software we attempt to balance our patron's familiarity and the most
effective software for their goals. We also offer open workshops and
course instruction on various data visualization and mapping topics.

While we would ideally like to be able to support the entire spectrum of
data visualization activities, one of the most challenging aspects of
supporting visualization is providing a scalable service or at least
supporting a variety of scales to best benefit one's campus. Providing
consultations around producing graphs and charts for presentations and
publications seems easily within the scope and scale of traditional
library consultations, but providing production services and assisting
with large scale projects such as the creation of interactive web
environments or visualizing terabytes of data often requires more time
and effort that we usually have to devote to individual projects. Still,
libraries, in providing a space for whatever assistance is possible and
helping researchers and students understand the resources required for a
given project, can offer an invaluable service to our campus
communities.

Supported projects at the University of Michigan:

19th Century Acts - <http://19thcenturyacts.com/>

Mapping Moby Dick - <http://record.umich.edu/articles/technology-meets-literature-students-map-classic-novel>

 

Many thanks for all the collaboration on the DVIG list, 

Amber Leahey (University of Toronto) & Justin Joque (University of
Michigan)
