+++
nid = "7830"
uid = "765"
author = "LHorton 2"
title = "DPC2018 Conference Report"
tags = [ "External Events",]
oldpath = "/blog/dpc2018-conference-report"
date = "2018-12-18 12:52:41 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
By Adetoun Oyelude, University of Ibadan

From Saturday 1st September 2018 when one of the participants from
Uganda arrived in Nigeria, the Digital Preservation Conference started
on a high note. The preparations for the Monday Opening Ceremony took
place on Sunday 2nd with the Ugandan participant joining at the venue in
preparing the Hall and other ancillaries concerning the conference. 

**Day 1: **The Opening Ceremony conference commenced at 11.45am on
Monday, 3rd September 2018. In attendance were dignitaries from public
and private sectors. The Chairman of the occasion was Barrister D. D.
Fer who is the Acting Director of National Archives of Nigeria. Dr
Abiola Abioye, the Chairman of the NLA-PACS delivered a welcome address.
The Keynote addresswas given by Prof. G. Olubunmi Alegbeleye of  Babcock
University, Ilisan Remo who is the Founding Chairman of the Section.
Prof Alegbeleye dwelt on the imperatives of digital preservation having
regards to the unique nature of digital information resources. James
Lowry, a digital preservation expert at Liverpool University Centre for
Archive Studies, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom contributed
a keynote remotely. His keynote focused on digital preservation in a
recessed economy with stringent budgets.

Goodwill messages were received from the National Librarian/CEO,
National Library of Nigeria, Director-General of National Information
Technology Development Agency (NITDA) and former President of Nigerian
Library Association, Alhaji Rilwanu Abdulsalam. The representatives of
the Head of Department of Library, Archival and Information Studies,
University of Ibadan and the Director of African Regional Centre for
Information Studies also presented goodwill messages on their behalf.
The Comptroller-General of the Nigerian Immigration Service was also
represented at the opening ceremony. The Director of the FCT Archives
and History Bureau, Ms. Cyril Jogai and the Librarian of the Nigerian
National Petroleum Company (NNPC) were also in attendance. The high
point of the opening ceremony was the unveiling of the Section's
website which participants at the opening ceremony instantly logged on
to using the link <https://nlapac.ng> to gain access. The role of the
International Association for Social Science Information Science and
Technology (IASSIST) in sponsoring the conference, was acknowledged and
emphasized and IASSIST's relevance in digital preservation was
highlighted. Group photographs were taken and refreshments served.

Immediately after the opening ceremony, 3 paper presentations by Prof.
G.O. Alegbeleye, Dr. Akinniyi Adeleke and Dr. Ngozi Azubogu were taken.
The first speaker presented An Overview of Digital Preservation
strategies while the other speakers presented two case studies of
Digital Preservation from Tekena Tamuno University Libray, Adeleke
University, Ede, and the Federal University of Technology, Owerri
Library respectively. The session was chaired by Prof Yacob Haliso of
Babcock University, Ilisan-Remo, Ogun State, Nigeria.

**Day 2: **Three Posters were presented by Grace Ikenna; Dr D'Anna
Shotts and Anthonia Ahima; and Adetoun Oyelude on different aspects of
digital preservation. The first was on the state of digital preservation
in the Kenneth Dike Library, University of Ibadan, Nigeria; the second
on the progress of digitization in the Northeastern Baptist collection
in Nigeria while the third was on the impact of IASSIST on digital
preservation in the African Region. Datasheets on IASSIST were
distributed to participants at the conference. They were encouraged to
visit the IASSIST website and join the network as Africa was poorly
represented in IASSIST. 

Apart from posters, six papers were presentated in very stimulating
sessions by Dr. Ezra Gbaje & Prof. Umar Ibrahim; Omobolade
Adeagbo/Sunday Obadare/Femi Oguntuase & Samson Akande; Kathryn Phillips
& Edidiong Eyo in the morning session. The afternoon session had Prince
Jacob Igwe & Chidinma; Ifeyinwa Okafor & Olalekan Awujoola and Aishat
Egbunu/ Adeyinka Koiki-Owoyele & Adefunke Alabi presenting on preserving
cultural heritage through digital preservation. After each session
activities, lots of networking, exchange of ideas, international
perspectives... name it!

**Day 3**- even more exciting! Four papers by Dr. Benedict Oladele;
Titilayo Ilesanmi; Christopher Okiki & Racheal Odunlade; and Adetoun
Oyelude & Winny Akullo were delivered in the morning session which
sparked stimulating discussions.

One needed to be there to listen to the afternoon session by Abass
Mustapha on Audio-Visual Digital Preservation of Yoruba Indigenous
Knowledge and its economic benefits, as well as the Busicon Exhibitor's
presentation on equipment for Digital Preservation and methods for it,
presented by Lola Akanbi, the CEO of the company. Quite a package!
Participants were practically 'chased out' from the venue at 5.45pm,
almost two hours beyond target, not due to lateness, but to the lively
discussions that kept coming. See!

And... without doubt, NLA-PACS is creating a networking family that say
nothing to each other, but come out with a colour code, simply
coincidental! *Code purple!*. It was fun!

**Day 4: **The Grand finale was grand! The three papers that ended the
conference were information packed, by Isaac Ajibola; Rachael Odunlade &
Chris Okiki; plus a final one from Okwor, Ihekwoaba *et al*. The
wrap-up, putting the communique together was another interesting
exercise. The communiquehas been issued! It can be found on the
[NLA-PACS website](https://nlapac.ng). In closing the conference, the
NLA-PACS Chairman, Dr. Abiola Abioye expressed appreciation to all those
who contributed in various respects to make the conference a reality. On
the whole, the Digital Preservation Conference 2018 was a huge success.
Lessons were however, learnt which will properly position NLA-PACS for
the next conference at which participants are expecting hands-on
workshops. 

Not less than 15 participants from Africa promised to join the IASSIST
network, and 3 who were members but in default, promising to renew their
membership and also contribute to the next IASSIST conference in Sydney,
Australia. The support from IASSIST ensured that the NLA-PACS website is
up and running; making the Section the 3rd Section of the Nigerian
Library Association to have a website (in spite of being almost the
newest Section); and also producing "a most exciting conference which
even though the first of its kind, is already giving the NLA Cataloguing
Classification and Indexing Section (the best Section for the year 2017)
a hot competition as the best," as described by a participant. The
conference evaluation forms gave lots more comments, even on the
innovative conference bags favoured by many participants!  The Section
is already looking forward to NLA-PACS 2019, the best yet to come!
