+++
nid = "3613"
uid = "662"
author = "SMcGinty"
title = "Feedback on Data Storage"
tags = [ "Data Archives and Service Providers", "Digital Repositories", "Research Data Management",]
oldpath = "/blog/feedback-data-storage"
date = "2014-02-06 13:35:13 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
I posted the following question to the listserv:

"I'm in the early days of exploring what I and our library can do for
our faculty and grad students. In my case I'm particularity interested
in the social sciences.

It seems there are three main choices:

1. ICPSR(or other domain-specific site)

2. Dataverse with my own school's branding

3. Local, campus funded storage through an Institutional Repository or
something else that can handle larger amounts of data.


Our university is kind of in the vast middle as far as flagship state
universities go in budgets and research activity.

What are the pros and cons of these archiving choices? What would best
suit a non-wealthy institution? Which requires more training and
expertise?"

From the very informative feedback I received from my IASSIST
colleagues, I concluded that it is best to keep open to all kinds of
possibilities. I was probably naïve in my initial hope that there would
be one solution on which I could train my energies. However that is not
the case. Different solutions may be best for different factors,
including the data in question, local staff skills,  and library
budgets.

There were many voices that supported the domain-specific repository
idea represented by ICPSR. Researchers can get exposure to colleagues in
their areas of expertise. There is no need to reinvent the wheel if the
expertise and the longevity that ICPSR can provide are out there. In
addition, ICPSR is launching "openICPSR," a new open access repository
for researchers and institutions that need to comply with Federal
requirements to make data publicly available.  Data deposited in
"openICPSR" will be discoverable in the ICPSR catalog, but not
restricted to ICPSR members -- anyone will be able to download.  ICPSR
staff will edit the metadata appearing in the catalog, and depositors
can commission full curation of their collections (e.g. full codebooks,
variable-level metadata for searching) by ICPSR staff. In addition to
accepting individual projects, openICPSR will also offer packages to
meet institutional needs.  They are planning at least two options: 1) A
multiple deposit option whereby an entity can purchase several project
deposits (fees will be discounted for member institutions), and 2) A
branded repository page that will list datasets under an institution's
own logo and color scheme.

Many others outlined the Dataverse picture. If you can get a good match
between what your campus needs and what Dataverse can provide, this can
be a crucial part of an overall solution.  Dataverse has ease of entry
through a self-service deposit structure, not to mention that the price
is right (free)! Many institutions are starting with pilot projects in
order to assess the labor impact on the library. A few librarians noted
that there are issues of long-term storage, sustainability, and metadata
uniformity that can arise with Dataverse.

Some respondents hastened to add that Dataverse will be offering
improved services.  Dataverse is extending support for additional
metadata standards in various scientific domains including biomedical
ontologies, astronomy and updating to DDI codebook 2.5 (in the future,
support for DDI Lifecycle). They are also extending the search, data
exploration and analysis for tabular datasets (with histograms,
cross-tabs, enhance descriptive stats, model selection). In addition
they are also extending Data/Metadata API and data deposit API, and rich
ingest for additional data types. 

Local solutions, including formal Institutional Repositories (IRs) and
other storage services through a variety of campus resources did not
emerge as a popular topic in the posts I received. One librarian
commented on the resources in personnel and money that may be needed in
IRs to deliver strong service for larger deposits.

Steve McGinty

Social Sciences Librarian

University of Massachusetts - Amherst
