+++
nid = "7182"
uid = "765"
author = "LHorton 2"
title = "Feel the Berg! IASSIST 2016"
tags = [ "IASSIST 2016",]
oldpath = "/blog/feel-berg-iassist-2016"
date = "2016-06-07 09:47:08 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iassist2016-logo.png"
+++
The conference began with a reception from the Mayor of Bergen,
beautifully performed Norwegian folk song, and dissent over the
conference hashtag (it was #iassist16).

The next morning data talk began with Gudmund Hernes. His plenary theme
is data availability or the latest "revolution" is, as it always has,
causing a shift in power. The role of IASSISTers and data archives
should be to "keep the record straight".

UK Data Service Director Matthew Woollard's plenary offered a similar
theme of adjustment to a changed data world. In sum, a data revolution
is only mature when lots of the data created as part of this revolution
is reusable. Therefore we need enhance trust between creators and
participants, and advocate data quality rather than quantity. Look for a
future IASSIST Quarterly article based on his plenary.

The theme of [quality and
reproducibility](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=128)
was captured in presentations by Christian (Odum) on data verification,
which found reproducibly to be a resource intensive activity with 92
percent of manuscripts submitted to Odum requiring resubmission.
Arguillas (Cornell) demonstrated R2 at CISER which runs replications.
Their job is not to find errors on behalf of researchers but to check
replication values; so if replicated study value is off by fraction of a
decimal the study is not replicated. Again, it is a time intensive
process so Arguillas advised researchers to "curate as you code and code
with reuse in mind". Brown (Cornell) talked about the CED2AR metadata
repository that works primarily with those accessing or wishing to
access restricted data files. Peer introduced Yale's new curation tool.
Curation for quality and reproducibility, she argued, will become
routinized when research data policies and culture mature to recognise
curation and sharing and tools to capture the entire workflow become
embedded in the research process.

Highlights in other concurrent sessions I attended included [Strategies
for Discussing and Communicating Data
Services](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=70)
where Herndon (Duke) and O'Reilly (Emory) emphasised how expectations of
transparency and sharing have changed. Meanwhile, Terrence Bennett (The
Collage of New Jersey) killed of his co-author in the name of data
sharing to show how negative messages have more impact.

"Teaching data" themed sessions included a systematic "scaffolding"
approach from [Sapp
Nelson](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=33)
(Perdue) on helping learners move across data management domains over
time. [Hofelich Mohr (Minnesota) and Motes
(Surrey)](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=65)
demonstrated teaching activities at the University of Minnesota which
included targeting courses with a research methods component. The
results are positive, but the costs in resources are intensive and the
need to be flexible is critical.
[Abbaspour](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=143)
(Lewis & Clark) presented lessons learnt from teaching undergraduate
students about data, including the lesson that when it comes to licences
undergraduate students have limited mental tolerance for a world that
deals in shades of grey, and is not simple black and white.

[Simpson](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=29)
and
[Wiltshire](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=46)
(UK Data Service) had presentations on supporting students and
researchers in using either using data for dissertations or on using
specific datasets.
[Scott](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=41)'s
(UK Data Service) audience was a little different: researchers applying
to use sensitive data. One thing that was positive to see here is how
sensitive data holding organisations in the UK are collaborating on this
training.

A sizable cohort from the UK Administrative Data Research Network
presented at IASSIST on how this service is tackling access to data and
its responsible reuse. Presentations from
[Knight](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=43)
and
[Greci](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=105)
provide examples. Continuing the theme of responsible reuse,
[Segadal](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=152)
(NSD) outlined the incoming European Union regulation on general data
protection and how it will affect researchers.

The international in IASSIST was demonstrated in a session on Research
Data Management Services, with speakers from Denmark, Canada, and India.
[Fink and
Olesen](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=59)
(DDA) presented the role the Danish National Archive will play in
supporting Data Management Planning.
[Mowers](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=156)
(Ottawa) presented a range of research data on management and sharing
practices that will inform support.
[Gunjal](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=159)
(NIT Rourkela) presented on the RDM challenges in India, his institution
as a case study, and on initiatives to build Indian data infrastructure.

A couple of librarian orientated sessions provided insights.
[Solis](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=28)
(NYU) offered findings on her research into economics graduate students
data-seeking behaviour, finding a lot of intuitive independent data
gathering activity and, worryingly, a "liberal" attitude to sharing
licenced data and a perturbing attitude that if something is online then
it will always be online.
[Hogenboom](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=109)
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) talked about building small
dataset collections, considering decisions on the basis of licence
terms, quality, money available, potential future use of data, and who
is requesting.
[Blake](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=126)
(Michigan) talked about a data grants programme they ran which saw
researchers competitively apply for data resources.
[Nobel](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=115)
(ICPSR) presented on their curating content activity, deciding to curate
studies submitted to Open ICPSR on the basis of methodological rigour,
reputation, high priority data, data and documentation quality.

The other data librarian session was built around a new book edited by
Kellam (UNCG) and Thompson (Windsor) and featuring a panel of
IASSISTers. No spoilers. [Go and buy the
book](http://www.alastore.ala.org/detail.aspx?ID=11774). But it was
interesting to hear how people found themselves in data librarian
positions, the different aspects of the role, and critically, the wide
ranging and (unrealistic?) expectations under which data librarian
positions are advertised.

A closing mention goes to this year's conference paper winners: Lafferty
Hess and Christian (ODUM) for their paper "[More Data, Less Process:
The Applicability of MPLP to Research
Data](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=125)"
in which they ask what the "golden minimum" is for archiving digital
data.

Finally, IASSIST recognised Libby Stephenson and Ann Green with
achievement awards for too many accomplishments to cover in this blog
post.

The conference closed with a little less polished singing than the
reception featured, hashtag wars resolved, and the IASSIST banner packed
and headed for #iassist17 in Lawrence, Kansas.

#iassist16 tweets are
[Storified](https://storify.com/iassistdata/iassist-2016) (including
#iassist2016 tweets).
