+++
nid = "4608"
uid = "643"
author = "LHorton"
title = "Hallelujah and praise the LARD! The first London Area Research Data group meeting"
tags = [ "Research Data Management",]
oldpath = "/blog/hallelujah-and-praise-lard-first-london-area-research-data-group-meeting"
date = "2014-11-10 05:22:34 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
LARD is London Area Research Data and this was its inaugural meeting,
informally bringing together various people from London based
institutions (and as far away as Reading) who are charged in some way
with Research Data Management (RDM) - be it research support or
repository work.

These are my notes, which lack attribution partly because I couldn't
remember where every person was from, and also it wasn't clear if the
meeting was on or off the record. Nonetheless, I felt there were some
interesting points that deserve sharing as an insight into how UK
universities (and one research centre) are dealing with RDM less than a
year away from the EPSRC deadline on
[expectations](http://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdata/) of
compliance for research data.

The first item in what was a free form discussion (think RDM jazz -
hence my beat style kind of note taking, with full stops however), was
policies. Some institutions have data policies, some have draft
policies, and others have no policy. The mood seemed to be that a policy
was more effective as a mandate for focusing university attention and
resources on support services, not so much for grabbing researchers'
attention. Researchers, it was said, tend to react more to what funders
want rather than university policies or documents. Those universities
that competed for Medical Research Council (MRC)
[funding](http://www.mrc.ac.uk/funding/) felt the MRC demanded
institutional data policies, and so those institutions tended to adopt
or have drafts ready for adoption. Yet most researchers are not funded
by one of the RCUK councils, and these are often funders without data
mandates. The group found a problem telling researchers that they don't
own their own data (it's often funders or institutions through employee
created works clauses). There was also a sense that researchers worry
about data protection and are looking for practical guidance on how to
keep data safe and secure. There was also a recognition that disciplines
matter, those disciplines that do not have a strong culture of sharing
data can be helped with the weight of institutional support providing
the infrastructure to support RDM. This tackles the disciplinary focus
of researchers, or localism. An example of how a bad experience can
focus attention was mentioned when a researcher lost data by plugging a
malware infected hard drive into a university network and had to have
the drive and the copy of the data destroyed. Episodes like this can be
used to tackle the culture of "improvisation" when it comes researchers
"backing-up" their data without, or without engaging, institutional
support. Aside from acting as a "wake-up" for researchers, they can push
universities into providing workable, easy to use, institutional storage
- either working storage or preservation in an institutional repository.

Discussion then moved round to the EPSRC expectations for research data,
with those who attended a recent [DCC
event](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/events/other-dcc-events/assessing-institutional-readiness)
on the EPSRC expectations reporting that the EPSRC are not looking to
get rid of opportunities for supporting research, so are not likely to
cut off funding come May 2015. However, they do expect to see evidence
that institutions are working towards or trying to improve storage,
support, and data discovery and access. Nonetheless, there is no doubt
the EPSRC policy has focused knowledge and effort in institutions
towards RDM. Then training was mentioned. When the "T" word is mentioned
I often think of that line about if people don't want to come how are
you going to stop them? To save us from preparing to teach to empty
rooms, the thinking now seems to be towards providing support when
people need it and building up a directory of experts to refer to when
appropriate. Structured support is based on identifying four key stages
in the data lifecycle: submitting a proposal (for help on data
management planning), when proposals are accepted (implementing RDM),
mid-project (supporting implementation), and towards the close to talk
about preservation. The key is to keep engagement with researchers. One
institution is trying to do this for all research projects at that
institution so is working with their research office to target RCUK
funded projects. Another institution initially plans to work with a
sample of projects.

By now the discussion had moved on to data management planning. One
institution had a Data Management Plan (DMP) template and DMP
requirement as part of its data policy, with separate plans for staff
and postgraduate students. The feeling was that template texts are not
such a good thing if they are copied and pasted into DMPs. A case was
mentioned of one research funder refusing to fund a project because the
DMP used identical text to another DMP submitted from that institution.
The DCC's [DMPOnline](https://dmponline.dcc.ac.uk) tool was mentioned,
particularly it's ability to be customised towards an institution. It
was also mentioned that DMPOnline has been much improved in later
versions. A policy was mentioned at one institution of not offering
storage until a DMP has been completed, another institution reported on
how there is a checkbox in the research office to signify that the DMP
has been looked at by the data management officer.

The RDM equivalent of [Godwin's
law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godwin's_law) (or Godwin's Rule of
Nazi Analogies), is that at some point cost will be mentioned. How to
cost RDM is an ongoing problem. Given the problem of identifying costs
that specifically relate to RDM activity, as opposed to to typical
research requirements that have an RDM aspect, an additional problem is
that RCUK funders mostly allow budgeting for RDM but that budgeting must
not identify activity that is supported as part of general institutional
funding. Auditing costs is a problem. Storage tends to have the easier
to identify costs (storage per byte for example), but this can be a
problem if data is stored in an institutional repository when the budget
for the project identified separate storage costs. For this reason,
solutions like [Arkivum](http://arkivum.com/) may be advantageous as
they can be specified as an auditable costs.

The coda to this discussion concerned metadata. It was said that funders
were keen on ensuring that good quality metadata accompanies research
data generated by projects they support, and that they are willing to
allow proposals that factor in additional time and resources for
metadata. However, an obvious problem is who should be adding that
metadata - is it researchers who know the data, but not necessarily the
standard or see its importance in the way RDM support staff do; or
should it be RDM staff, particularly repository staff, who know they
type of information required but do not necessarily know the data or
discipline that well. Finally, hitting on a standard that that is
applicable to all data is a problem. Social science is not the same as
genetics; art history is not the same as management. It was then asked
if there was a way to harvest metadata when that metadata is created
elsewhere (say, the UK Data Service). Both the DCC and UK Data Service
are working on a Jisc funded [Research Data Registry and Discovery
Service](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/projects/research-data-registry-pilot) and
the European Union are also working on data discovery platforms that
imports/exports catalogue record metadata.

The feeling at the end of this initial meeting was LARD provided a
useful forum for sharing practice and learning from contemporaries and
there was enthusiasm for follow-up meetings including those based around
structured themes. If you work in a big city, and there are people doing
similar things to you in that city, take advantage and get together to
talk. So, thanks to Gareth Knight (LSHTM), Stephen Grace (UEL), and
Veronica Howe (KCL) for organising, facilitating, and hosting LARD #1.
