+++
nid = "3032"
uid = "19"
author = "StuartM"
title = "IASSIST Quarterly (2011: Fall)"
tags = [ "Data Access & Open Data", "Tools, Apps, Technology", "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-quarterly-2011-fall"
date = "2012-01-31 08:32:04 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
### **Sharing data and building information**

With this issue (volume 35-3, 2011) of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ) we
return to the regular format of a collection of articles not within the
same specialist subject area as we have seen in recent special issues of
IQ. Naturally the three articles presented here are related to the IQ
subject area in general, as in: assisting research with data, acquiring
data from research, and making good use of the user community. This last
topic could also be spelled "involvement". The hope is that these
articles will carry involvement to the IASSIST community, so that the
gained knowledge can be shared and practised widely.


"Mind the gap" is a caveat to passengers on the London Underground. The
authors of this article are Susan Noble, Celia Russell and Richard
Wiseman, all affiliated with ESDS-International hosted by Mimas at the
University of Manchester in the UK. The ESDS, standing for "Economic and
Social Data Service", are extending their reach beyond the UK. In the
article "Mind the Gap: Global Data Sharing" they are looking into how
today's research on the important topics of climate change, economic
crises, migration and health requires cross-national data sharing.
Clearly these topics are international (e.g. the weather or air
pollution does not stop at national borders), but the article discusses
how existing barriers prevent global data sharing. The paper is based on
a presentation in a session on "Sharing data: High Rewards, Formidable
Barriers" at the IASSIST 2009 conference. It is demonstrated how even
international data produced by intergovernmental organizations like the
International Monetary Fund, the International Energy Agency, OECD, the
United Nations and the World Bank are often only available with an
expensive subscription, presented in complex incomprehensible tables,
through special interfaces; such barriers are making the international
use of the data difficult. Because of missing metadata standards it is
difficult to evaluate the quality of the dataset and to search for and
locate the data resources required. The paper highlights the development
of e-learning materials that can raise awareness and ease access to
international data. In this case the example is e-learning for the
"United Nations Millennium Development Goals".


The second paper is also related to the sharing of data with an
introduction to the international level. "The Research-Data-Centre in
Research-Data-Centre Approach: A First Step Towards Decentralised
International Data Sharing" is written by Stefan Bender and Jörg Heining
from the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) in Nuremberg, Germany.
In order to preserve the confidentiality of single entities, access to
complete datasets is often restricted to monitored on-site analysis.
Although off-site access is facilitated in other countries, Germany has
relied on on-site security. However, an opportunity has been presented
where Research Data Centre sites are placed at Statistical Offices
around Germany, and also at a Michigan centre for demography. The
article contains historical information on approaches and developments
in other countries and has a special focus on the German solution. The
project will gain experience in the complex balance between
confidentiality and analysis, and the differences between national laws.


The paper by Stuart Macdonald from EDINA in Scotland originated as a
poster session at the IASSIST 2010 conference. The name of the paper is
"AddressingHistory: a Web2.0 community engagement tool and API". The
community consists of members within and outside academia, as local
history groups and genealogists are using the software to enhance and
combine data from historical Scottish Post Office Directories with
large-scale historical maps. The background and technical issues are
presented in the paper, which also looks into issues and perspectives of
user generated content. The "crowdsourcing" tool did successfully
generate engagement and there are plans for further development, such as
upload and attachment of photos of people, buildings, and landmarks to
enrich the collection.

Articles for the IQ are always very welcome. They can be papers from
IASSIST conferences or other conferences and workshops, from local
presentations or papers especially written for the IQ. If you don't have
anything to offer right now, then please prepare yourself for the next
IASSIST conference and start planning for participation in a session
there. Chairing a conference session with the purpose of aggregating and
integrating papers for a special issue IQ is much appreciated as the
information in the form of an IQ issue reaches many more people than the
session participants and will be readily available on the IASSIST
website at http://www.iassistdata.org.

Authors are very welcome to take a look at the instructions and layout:
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>.


Authors can also contact me via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should you be
interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest editor(s) I
will also be delighted to hear from you.

 

Karsten Boye Rasmussen

December 2011
