+++
nid = "7782"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IASSIST Quarterly Volume 42:2 now available!"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-quarterly-volume-422-now-available"
date = "2018-07-19 06:13:26 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
## Editor's notes:  Metadata is key - the most important data after data

Welcome to the [second issue of volume 42 of the IASSIST Quarterly](https://iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/issue/view/3 "2")
(IQ 42:2, 2018).

The IASSIST Quarterly has had several papers on many different aspects
of the Data Documentation Initiative - for a long time better known by
its acronym DDI, without any further explanation. DDI is a brand. The
IASSIST Quarterly has also included special issues of collections of
papers concerning DDI.

Among staff at data archives and data libraries, as well as the users of
these facilities, I think we can agree that it is the data that comes
first. However, fundamental to all uses of data is the documentation
describing the data, without which the data are useless. Therefore, it
comes as no surprise that the IASSIST Quarterly is devoted partly to the
presentation of papers related to documentation. The question of
documentation or data resembles the question of the chicken or the egg.
Don't mistake the keys for your car. The metadata and the data belong
together and should not be separated.

DDI now is a standard, but as with other standards it continues to
evolve. The argument about why standards are good comes to mind: 'The
nice thing about standards is that you have so many to choose from!'.
DDI is the de facto standard for most social science data at data
archives and university data libraries.

The first paper demonstrates a way to tackle the heterogeneous character
of the usage of the DDI. The approach is able to support collaborative
questionnaire development as well as export in several formats including
the metadata as DDI. The second paper shows how an institutionalized and
more general metadata standard - in this case the Belgian Encoded
Archival Description (EAD) - is supported by a developed crosswalk from
DDI to EAD. However, IQ 42:2 is not a DDI special issue, and the third
paper presents an open-source research data management platform called
Dendro and a laboratory notebook called LabTablet without mentioning
DDI. However, the paper certainly does mention metadata - it is the key
to all data.

The winner of the paper competition of the IASSIST 2017 conference is
presented in this issue. 'Flexible DDI Storage' is authored by Oliver
Hopt, Claus-Peter Klas, Alexander Mühlbauer, all affiliated with GESIS -
the Leibniz-Institute for the Social Sciences in Germany. The authors
argue that the current usage of DDI is heterogeneous and that this
results in complex database models for each developed application. The
paper shows a new binding of DDI to applications that works
independently of most version changes and interpretative differences,
thus avoiding continuous reimplementation. The work is based upon their
developed DDI-FlatDB approach, which they showed at the European DDI
conferences in 2015 and 2016, and which is also described in the paper.
Furthermore, a web-based questionnaire editor and application supports
large DDI structures and collaborative questionnaire development as well
as production of structured metadata for survey institutes and data
archives. The paper describes the questionnaire workflow from the start
to the export of questionnaire, DDI XML, and SPSS. The development is
continuing and it will be published as open source. 

The second paper is also focused on DDI, now in relation to a new data
archive. 'Elaborating a Crosswalk Between Data Documentation Initiative
(DDI) and Encoded Archival Description (EAD) for an Emerging Data
Archive Service Provider' is by Benjamin Peuch who is a researcher at
the State Archives of Belgium. It is expected that the future Belgian
data archive will be part of the State Archives, and because DDI is the
most widespread metadata standard in the social sciences, the State
Archives have developed a DDI-to-EAD crosswalk in order to re-use their
EAD infrastructure. The paper shows the conceptual differences between
DDI and EAD - both XML based - and how these can be reconciled or
avoided for the purpose of a data archive for the social sciences. The
author also foresees a fruitful collaboration between traditional
archivists and social scientists.

The third paper is by a group of scholars connected to the Informatics
Engineering Department of University of Porto and the INESC TEC in
Portugal. Cristina Ribeiro, João Rocha da Silva, João Aguiar Castro,
Ricardo Carvalho Amorim, João Correia Lopes, and Gabriel David are the
authors of 'Research Data Management Tools and Workflows: Experimental
Work at the University of Porto'. The authors start with the statement
that 'Research datasets include all kinds of objects, from web pages to
sensor data, and originate in every domain'. The task is to make these
data visible, described, preserved, and searchable. The focus is on data
preparation, dataset organization and metadata creation. Some groups
were proposed a developed open-source research data management platform
called Dendro and a laboratory notebook called LabTablet, while other
groups that demanded a domain-specific approach had special developed
models and applications. All development and metadata modelling have in
sight the metadata dissemination.

Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and
workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for the
IQ. When you are preparing such a presentation, give a thought to
turning your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. Doing
that after the event also gives you the opportunity of improving your
work after feedback. We encourage you to login or create an author login
to <https://www.iassistquarterly.com> (our Open Journal System
application). We permit authors 'deep links' into the IQ as well as
deposition of the paper in your local repository. Chairing a conference
session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a
special issue IQ is also much appreciated as the information reaches
many more people than the limited number of session participants and
will be readily available on the IASSIST Quarterly website at
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com>.  Authors are very welcome to take a
look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should
you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest
editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - June, 2018
