+++
nid = "1057"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "IASSIST letter to Canadian Government on loss of 2011 Census long form"
tags = [ "Data-related Advocacy", "Canada",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-letter-canadian-government-loss-2011-census-long-form"
date = "2010-10-05 13:44:28 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
Industry Canada
Office of the Honourable Tony Clement
Minister of Industry
C.D. Howe Building
235 Queen Street
Ottawa, ON K1A 0H5                                25 July 2010



Dear Minister Clement

We write on behalf of the International Association of Social Science
Information Services and  Technology.    IASSIST is an international
organization of professionals working in and with information technology
and data services to support research and teaching in the social
sciences. Its 300 members are from a variety of workplaces, including
data archives, statistical agencies, research centers, libraries,
academic departments, government departments, and non-profit
organizations.


We respectfully express our concern about the recent decision of the
Canadian Federal Government to eliminate the long-form questionnaire as
part of the 2011 Census of Population. We encourage the Government of
Canada to put this decision on hold, and engage in an open dialogue
about the value of the Census.   Data from the Census Long Form are
unique, and are a critical source of information related to evidenced
based policy development, not only within Canada but beyond.  


In our organization we are exposed to data gathering from many countries
and we have seen many good decisions and we have seen many poor
decisions.  It is not always clear up front what the long term
implications may be.   It is safe to say that Statistics Canada, and
Canada in general, are looked up to in terms of the wealth of
information available, the participation rate of the citizenry and the
privacy framework around survey data.  That is not to say all is
perfect, but there is certainly something valuable, that is worth
protecting.
We have watched many thoughtful comments being made around the
importance of the long form census in Canada.  Canada needs to ensure
that they make the right decision, because if you eliminate the 2011
long form, you cannot go back and replace it.  It will be lost forever.


IASSIST can offer comment on a few key issues:


•    There are several international projects linking census data across
countries, that allow for a rich comparison.   We are concerned that if
Canada eliminates the Long Form Questionnaire, it will become much more
difficult to make these comparisons, and Canada will be left behind.  In
addition many post-census surveys in Canada rely on the Census Sampling
Frame.  Without the long form, this sampling frame will not be
available, and we will see an erosion of other valuable Canadian
surveys.

•    IASSIST questions the validity of the voluntary National Household
Survey replacement survey.  From a methodological point of view, a
voluntary survey cannot substitute for a mandatory census due to uneven
response rates among various subgroups of the population.  A larger
sample size will not solve this fundamental problem; indeed, a mandatory
census of the entire population is the only survey where citizens from
all socio-economic groupings are sampled and the quality of the
information is maximized.

•    The fact that there was no consultation with the community around
this critical decision is also of concern to IASSIST.   Although we
understand there was an open public consultation around the 2011 census,
we are disappointed there was never any indication that there would be
no long form.  From a distance we have seen a significant expression of
concerns, from  both the public and the private sector, and this
suggests a need for more dialogue.

•    The protection of an individual's privacy is a significant issue in
all countries, and Statistics Canada is one of the most respected
institutions in the world when it comes to protecting the privacy of
survey respondents.  Canada is in an enviable position when it comes to
the survey response rate of it's citizens.  We see this as a direct
reflection of the trust that the general public places in the
institution.  For the government to jeopardize this trust, in such a
public forum is irresponsible and of great concern to us.

The  Census is unique, and a recognized building block for creating
evidence-based public policy.  We feel strongly that there needs to be
more dialogue before undertaking the irreversible decision of
eliminating the long form.   The impacts will be far reaching, beyond
the census itself.  Eliminating Canada 2011 long form census will erode
Canada's ability to participate in international comparative analysis
and will leave Canada at a disadvantage relative to other countries.  

Yours sincerely,



Melanie F. Wright
President
International Association for Social Science Information Service and
Technology




William C. Block
Vice President
International Association for Social Science Information Service and
Technology



c.c.  
Industry Science and Technology Committee ----.
http://www2.parl.gc.ca/CommitteeBusiness/CommitteeMembership.aspx?Cmte=INDU&Language=E&Mode=1&Parl=40&Ses=3
The Rt. Hon. Stephen Harper;
 Opposition critics for Industry Canada :  Robert Bouchard (Bloc); Marc
Garneau (Liberal); Brian Masse (NDP)

