+++
nid = "7779"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IASSIST Quarterly Volume 42:1 available"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-quarterly-volume-421-available"
date = "2018-05-24 08:33:10 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
**Editor's notes:  Rebuilding, Preserving and Reproducing**

Welcome to the first issue of Volume 42 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
42:1, 2018).

The IASSIST Quarterly has a focus on curation, preservation and
reproduction of research, and all three bases are covered in this issue.
The reproduction of earlier results from archived data is a validation
of the data and also of the earlier research. The mimicking reuse of
data for reproduction of the original results is the normal first step
before use of the data for new purposes. This IQ starts with a paper on
reproduction. Before reproduction is possible, intensive work is
required at the earliest stage to curate the data, and in the case of
older data - as presented in this issue - a costly process of rebuilding
the data from old formats and forms of storage. Between the
establishment of the data as a resource and the subsequent reproduction,
the preservation process secures the data for future use. The middle
paper brings special attention to preservation of 3D digital data.

At the IASSIST 2017 conference the presentation 'Reproducing and
Preserving Research with ReproZip' was given at the session 'E3: Tools
for Reproducible Workflows Across the Research Lifecycle'. This is
presented here as a paper with the title 'Using ReproZip for
Reproducibility and Library Services' by Vicky Steeves, Rémi Rampin,
and Fernando Chirigati. The authors work at New York University as
Librarian for Research Data Management and Reproducibility, Research
Engineer, and PhD candidate. They present ReproZip, an open source tool
designed to help overcome the technical difficulties involved in
preserving and replicating research, ranging from digital humanities to
machine learning as well as library services. The paper addresses the
concept of computational reproducibility leading to capture and
preservation of digital environments, and the creation of a file that
encapsulates metadata about the computational environment - including
the operating system, hardware architecture, and software library
dependencies - in order to achieve reproducibility. The authors state
that ReproZip can be used to reproduce and preserve research
holistically.

At the same conference in the session 'E1: Preservation Matters'
Jennifer Moore of Washington University Libraries in St. Louis and
Hannah Scates Kettler of University of Iowa Libraries presented their
paper 'Who cares about 3D data preservation?'. Well, the IQ does! 3D
digital data preservation is necessary when for example an
anthropologist produces digital 3D data as a preservation and
presentation mechanism for an artefact. The 3D digital data has - like
other data - to be treated for preservation. The artefact could be a
building, and the paper holds much technical information and literature
that refers to various interesting 3D projects; for example the
Augmented Asbury Park app that projects lost - and now virtual -
buildings and attractions upon their earlier physical space using
augmented reality.

The last paper in this issue is 'Retirement in the 1950s: Rebuilding a
Longitudinal Research Database' by Amy M. Pienta and Jared Lyle,
respectively Associate Research Scientist and Director of Curation at
ICPSR at the University of Michigan. This tells the story of the
successful recovery of the important data from Gordon Streib's Cornell
Study of Occupational Retirement (CSOR). The paper includes the caveat
that the work involved in rescuing these old data was many times more
expensive than curating newer data would be. The CSOR followed a large
(over 4,000 person) national cohort of retirement-age men and women in
the period 1952 to 1958. The study is of great value for research in
such areas as the relationships between health and gender and
retirement. The data was deemed unrecoverable, as the punched cards did
not directly match the documentation. Further work and additional
materials were required to make it possible. The data is enriched by
collections of several types of health records and examinations; some
remaining in paper form that can be consulted for closer investigation
on-site at ICPSR.                                            

Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We encourage you to login or create an author login to
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com> .  We welcome input from IASSIST
conferences or other conferences and workshops, from local presentations
or papers especially written for the IQ. When you are preparing a
presentation, give a thought to turning your one-time presentation into
a lasting contribution. We permit authors 'deep links' into the IQ as
well as deposition of the paper in your local repository. Chairing a
conference session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating
papers for a special issue IQ is also much appreciated as the
information reaches many more people than the session participants, and
will be readily available on the IASSIST Quarterly website at
http://www.iassistquarterly.com. 

Authors are very welcome to take a look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should
you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest
editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - April, 2018
