+++
nid = "3692"
uid = "227"
author = "l.martinez-uribe"
title = "IASSIST Fellows 2014"
tags = [ "Africa", "Community of Data Professionals", "Asia/Pacific", "Data-related Advocacy", "Professional Development", "Europe", "IASSIST 2014",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-fellows-2014"
date = "2014-04-10 08:05:34 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
The IASSIST Fellows Committee is glad to announce through this post the
four recipients of the 2014 IASSIST Fellowship award. We are extremely
excited to have such a diverse and interesting group with different
backgrounds and experience and encourage IASSISTers to welcome them at
our conference in Toronto, Canada.
Please find below their names, countries and brief bios:

***Antonin Benoit, Head Librarian at the African Institute for Economic
Development and Planning. Dakar, Senegal.***

 "As the head Librarian I am the manager of our Online Database called
IDEP document server (http://www.unidep.org/library). We provide via
this tool an access to bibliographical and textual references. In
another hand I am the a focal point of IDEP to work with African Centre
of Statistics (ACS) to compile an Inventory of all existing data
resources in my Institute. The ACS is a division of UNECA and it is
located in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia). I am then devoted to provide data
used for statistical analysis and publications in the Existing Data
Resources of UNECA (http://ecastats.uneca.org/cdsr/). I am also very
familar with metadata standards like MarcXML and Dublin Core that I use
frequently in my job through our Document server. My main objective is
to make our Institute the first African Library catalog to enter the
Open Linked Data project. So, attending the IASSIST conference could
improve my capacities on data management, because my initial
professional background is Librarianship and I still have some
weaknesses on data management"

***Fei Yu, Acting Manager of Research Data Collections  at the
University of Queensland Library. Brisbane, Australia.***

 "Fei has gained a wide range of experience in academic libraries
including bibliometrics and research data management.  She was recently
successful in being appointed as Manager, Research Data Collections.
 This has involved drafting  the Research Data Management Procedures
which will underpin the University of Queensland Research Data
Management Policy that was approved at the end of 2013.  She is involved
in promoting best practice in data management for all of UQ and has
established a wide range of Data Information Literacy training courses
for UQ researchers and ensuring that their research data collection
metadata is accurate and available on the institutional repository - UQ
eSpace.  She is presently rolling out the online data management tool
(based on the UK Digital Curation Center (DCC) tool) university wide to
ensure that all university researchers and research students have an
easy and accessible tool to create their data management plans.  The
Research Data Collections team lead by Fei created the Research Data
Management Guide  - a one stop shop -- containing detailed information
on all aspects of data management.  Fei also works collaboratively with
the University's Research Computing Centres and the Queensland Cyber
Infrastructure to ensure that staff are aware of the many data storage
options. "

***Aileen O'Carroll, Policy Manager of the Digital Repository at the
Digital Repository of Ireland. Dublin, Ireland.***

 "I am currently Policy Manager of the Digital Repository of Ireland
(DRI). DRI is a newly established national organisation (the project was
established in September 2011) whose remit is to link together and
preserve the rich and varied cultural, historical, and qualitative
social science data held by Irish Institutions. It will be a central
access point to this digital data and provide multimedia tools to
research and interact with archived data. My role requires me to have a
thorough understanding of international best practice in licensing
frameworks, digitisation policy, archival management, and an
understanding of the different needs and perspectives of a wide range of
stalk-holders and users. It is of key importance that this emerging
national infrastructure is aligned both with European and International
best practice along with practice and policy already in place in a
diverse field of Irish cultural, educational and social scientific
organisations."

***Winny Nekesa, Senior Library and Documentation Officer at the Public
Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority. Kampala, Uganda.***

 "Winny Nekesa Akullo obtained a Bachelors degree in Library and
Information Science in 2003, Postgraduate Diploma in Demography in 2014
from Makerere University and finalized her thesis for the  Masters
Degree in Information Science. Before joining the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Public Assets Authority as a Senior Library and
Documentation Officer in 2014, she worked as an Information
Officer/Librarian at Uganda Bureau of Statistics where she was in charge
of information management and data dissemination and was spearheading
the establishment of a UBOS Digital Library and a School Senior
Librarian. She has international training and exposure in establishing
digital libraries, preservation and construction and application of
information systems. She is the Country Coordinator of the International
Librarians' Network, Publicity Secretary, Uganda Library and Information
Association and the General Secretary, Uganda Textbook-Academic and
Non-Fiction Authors' Association.  Her area of expertise is digital
preservation and data dissemination. Currently her main research
interests are information retrieval, digital preservation and open
access repositories. She presented at the 2013 IASSIST Conference
"Establishing a National Statistical Information Repository in Uganda;
Challenges and Opportunities"  she got a lot of exposure, and new ideas
about data and information management. This year, I hope to gain more
information which I can apply to my new institution especially in the
area of data management which is still virgin."
