+++
nid = "3705"
uid = "364"
author = "H.L. Woolfrey"
title = "IASSIST Africa Regional Report 2013-2014"
tags = [ "Africa", "Community of Data Professionals", "Reports & Studies", "Data Access & Open Data", "IASSIST 2014", "Research Data Management",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-africa-regional-report-2013-2014"
date = "2014-05-16 06:26:57 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/20140221_121_training-460.jpg"
+++
### Freeing African Data

Two regional developments have the potential to get African government
data into the public domain. Putting their disaggregated data out there
can benefit African governance through ensuring transparency and
allowing feedback from policy analysis to support better government
planning. [The World Bank's Central microdata
catalog](http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog?sk=) has been
around since 2012 and continues to expand its listing of data sources.
This is currently the only comprehensive online source for microdata
produced by African official data producers, as a listing of country
datasets is not available on most African government websites.

While the World Bank project supports improve data discovery, a second
donor project aims for more Open Government Data. The [Accelerated Data
Program](http://adp.ihsn.org/) is an OECD project to make African
government data more accessible. This project works to install data
dissemination software with government data producers such as ministries
and statistics offices. Currently data is available from statistics
offices in several countries which are using this platform. These
include Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, and
Tunisia.

The ADP also trains data managers in African National Statistics
Offices. While data expertise is necessary to leverage national data
resources data curation training projects are scarce in African
countries. In 2013-2014 the ADP ran data management training workshops
in Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia, and ADP trainers teamed up with staff
from the University of Cape Town's Data Service to conduct data curation
training workshops in Botswana, Lesotho, and Rwanda.

![](/img/blog/20140221_121_training-460.jpg "Training")

Another move towards Openness is the establishment of a Research Data
Centre at the University of the Cape Coast in Ghana.  This will make
Ghanaian data more widely available to local researchers and to the
wider research community. Currently Ghanaian data can be purchased from
the government data producer, which may keep out researchers from
poorly-resourced institutions. The University of Cape Town in South
Africa and the University of Michigan in the US are working with
University of Cape Coast staff to support data curation best practice at
the new centre, with funding from [University of Michigan's African Social Research Initiative](http://www.ii.umich.edu/asc/initiatives/africansocialresearchinitiativeasri).

### African Universities Managing their Data Assets

The University of Cape Town in South Africa has been engaged Research
Data Management policymaking in 2013-2014. IASSIST member Lynn Woolfrey
and a team from the University Library undertook a University data needs
survey and a scoping study of policies of other universities and
completed a
[report](http://www.datafirst.uct.ac.za/images/docs/20140307-uct-rsearch-data-management-woolfrey.pdf)
and draft policy document which will be built on by Stakeholders at the
University to produce a university-wide policy for managing research
data into the future. The policy will ensure the University is in
forefront of what will become standard practice at universities in the
future.

### African Data Conferences

[5th African Conference for Digital Scholarship and
Curation](http://nedicc.com/5th-african-conference-for-digital-scholarship-and-curation/)
was held in Durban, South Africa, in June 2013.  The Conference brought
together data experts from African countries under the theme of
*Research data in the advance of education, research, and innovation.*
IASSIST's Lynn Woolfrey gave a presentation on data curation best
practice at a post-conference workshop organised by South Africa's
[Network of Data and Information Curation
Communities](http://nedicc.com/2012/08/23/nedicc/) (NeDiCC).

{{< figure src="/img/blog/20130625-acdsc5-participants.jpg" title="Delegates at the 5th African Conference for Digital Scholarship and Curation" >}}

The [first Isibalo data users'
conference](http://www.statssa.gov.za/isibalo_conference/welcome.asp)
was organised by Statistics South Africa at the University of
Stellenbosch in Stellenbosch, South Africa, in July 2013. The Conference
was an opportunity for feedback on the relevance of South African data
for academia and local government decision makers and augers well for
future producer-user interactions around data quality issues.

The annual [eResearch Africa
Conference](http://eresearch.ac.za/join-us-for-eresearch-africa-2013/)
was held in Cape Town, South Africa in October 2013. Under the banner
*ICT Enabling Research* presenters from Australia, the UK, and African
countries discussed eResearch projects and brain-stormed future
e-Research strategies. IASSIST member Lynn Woolfrey presented research
undertaken on [data accessibility for research on
Africa](http://eresearch.ac.za/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/20131008-eresearch-africa-woolfrey.pdf).
