+++
nid = "672"
uid = "11"
author = "San"
title = "IASSIST Quarterly 32 available on-line"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-quarterly-32-available-line"
date = "2010-01-15 15:55:31 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-2.jpg"
+++
The [IASSIST Quarterly (IQ) volume 32
2008](http://www.iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iqvol32.html) contains
a collection of the 1, 2, 3, and 4 issues into a single issue for 2008.

Nikos Askitas is the head of the International Data Service Center of
the Institute for the Study of Labor in Germany (IZA). At the 2008
IASSIST conference he presented what is here an article on the ["Data
Documentation and Remote Computing at the International Data Service
Center of
IZA."](http://www.iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iq32/iqvol321_4askitas.pdf)

The data documentation of the IDSC that started with translation of
German metadata into English has developed into a detailed, in depth,
searchable and standardized information service, especially helpful for
comparative research. The datasets are in the areas: Employment and
Wages, Education and Training, and Demographics and Migration. The
documentation is available in HTML, PDF, and as DDI-files. This
documentation production is explained in the first part of the article.
In the second part of the article the IDSC experience with "remote
computing" is described. Germany uses the concept of "factual
anonymization" and the production of "scientific use files". However,
such files are not allowed for export. Instead IDSC supplies interfaces
to scientists with both local and remote support for which IDSC has
developed special software (JoSuA). 

The article ["A Documentation Model
for Comparative Research Based on Harmonization
Strategies"](http://www.iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iq32/iqvol321_4kallas.pdf),
by John Kallas from University of the Aegean at Mytilene on Lesvos,
Greece and Apostolos Linardis from the National Centre for Social
Research in Athens, is proposing a documentation model for both
longitudinal and cross-cultural studies. Different harmonization
strategies are examined and three documentation models are proposed. The
authors have chosen the term "cross-cultural" rather than
"cross-national" as cultural discrepancies may exist within the same
nation. The article underlines the importance of the data element, the
concept, the universe, and the classification as they are study
components where even small changes may affect the overall
comparability. This is leading to looking at the stages for the
different types of harmonization strategies: ex ante input, ex ante
output, and ex post. Most documentation processes at data archives are
ex post harmonization. The authors are aware that the proposed study
documentation procedure is laborious for the researchers; however, the
positive side is the benefits in searching and locating the data. 

At the
2009 IASSIST conference in the session "Protecting Privacy While
Preserving Access: Restricted Use Data and Disclosure Considerations",
Sharon Bolton and Matthew Woollard gave a presentation that is now an
article titled "[Strengthening Data Security: an Holistic
Approach](http://www.iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iq32/iqvol321_4bolton.pdf)"
and they are advocating exactly that. The authors both work at UK Data
Archive (UKDA) as Data Services Manager and Head of Digital Preservation
and Systems. The holistic approach to data security includes "the
education of data creators in the reduction of disclosure risk, the
integration of robust and appropriate data processing, handling and
management procedures, the value of emerging technological solutions,
the training of data users in data security, and the importance of
management control, as well as the need to be informed by emerging
government security and digital preservation standards". The background
is a massive governmental data loss that hit front pages and has
resulted in reports and laws with criminal penalties for the disclosure
of confidential information. These lessons as well as the laws are
relevant for the archival society. The UKDA had an audit of its
"in-house data handling" which resulted in existing good practice being
identified and additional methods developed. These were collated into a
comprehensive set of data security procedures with effect for both UKDA
staff and the users. 

At the same IASSIST conference in the session
"Sharing Data: High Rewards, Formidable Barriers" Carina Carlhed and
Iris Alfredsson from respectively Mälardalen University, Sweden and the
Swedish National Data Service (SND) presented a report from an
investigation carried out earlier in 2009. The report has been turned
into an article for the IQ with the title: "[Swedish National Data
Service's Strategy for Sharing and Mediating Data. Practices of Open
Access to and Reuse of Research Data - The State of the Art in Sweden
2009](http://www.iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iq32/iqvol321_4alfredsson.pdf)".
The report is based upon a joint project between SND and four university
libraries that carried out a national survey of existing databases and
database research, as well as attitudes towards data sharing among
researchers. This was carried out by email questionnaires sent to
professors and doctoral students. In general the results show that
doctoral students expressed great uncertainty about questions of amounts
of reusable digital data, while professors emphasize lack of resources
for researchers to document and make their data accessible for others.
The groups consider the most effective interventions for enhancing
accessibility to digital data to be that research grants should include
funds for preparing the data for sharing and archiving, and that
archiving data for use by the scientific community is acknowledged to be
of scientific merit. A similar study was carried out in Finland and
compared to this Swedish study. We hope to present the Finnish study in
a later issue of the IQ. The Swedish Research Council founded in 2006 a
Database Infrastructure Committee (DISC) to promote the development of
an effective infrastructure for sharing research data. A product of this
initiative has been the formation of the Swedish National Data Service
(SND) that also is described in the article. The article further
describes the procedures of the surveys and there might be followers for
doing similar user investigations among other data organizations. The
survey contains questions as to the knowledge of plans such as the
roadmap "The Swedish Research Council´s Guide to Infrastructure"
(2007) and the "OECD Guidelines on Open Access to Research Data from
Public Funding" (2007). Answers to these questions exhibited a low
level of knowledge, as did questions about making own data available.
Read more in the article, and also about reasons given for not reusing
digital data, and the seven suggested obstacles to sharing digital data.
