+++
nid = "3396"
uid = "227"
author = "l.martinez-uribe"
title = "IASSIST Fellows 2013"
tags = [ "Africa", "Community of Data Professionals", "Archiving, Preservation, Curation", "Asia/Pacific", "Data-related Advocacy", "Canada", "Data Access & Open Data", "Professional Development", "Data Archives and Service Providers", "Europe", "United States", "IASSIST 2013", "Research Data Management", "Social Science Datasets", "News and Announcements", "IASSIST Regions",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-fellows-2013"
date = "2013-05-06 19:38:07 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
** **

The IASSIST Fellows Committee is glad to announce through this post the
six recipients of the 2013 IASSIST Fellowship award. We are extremely
excited to have such a diverse and interesting group with different
backgrounds and experience and encourage IASSISTers to welcome them at
our conference in Cologne, Germany.

Please find below their names, countries and brief bios:

**Chifundo Kanjala (Tanzania) **

Chifundo currently works as a Data Manager and data documentalist for an
HIV research group called ALPHA network based at London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine's department of Population Health,
Chifundo spends most of his time in Mwanza, Tanzania but do travel from
time around Southern and Eastern Africa to work with colleagues in the
ALPHA network.Before joining the London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, he was working as a Data analyst consultant at Unicef,
Zimbabwe.Currently working part time on a PhD with London school of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He has an MPhil in Demography from
university of Cape Town, South Africa and a BSc Statistics Honours
degree from University of Zimbabwe.


**Judit Gárdos (Hungary) **

Judit Gárdos studied Sociology and German Language and Literature in
Budapest, Vienna and Berlin. She is PhD-candidate in sociology, with a
topic on the philosophy, sociology and anthropology of quantitative
sociology. She is young researcher at the Institute of Sociology of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Judit has been working at the digital
archive and research group called "voicesofthe20century.hu" that is
collecting qualitative, interview-based sociological research
collections of the last 50 years. She is coordinating the work at the
newly-funded Research Documentation Center of the Center for Social
Sciences at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.


**Cristina Ribeiro (Portugal) **

Cristina Ribeiro is an Assistant Professor in Informatics Engineering at
Universidade do Porto and a researcher at INESC TEC. She has graduated
in Electrical Engineering, holds a Master in Electrical and Computer
Engineering and a Ph.D. in Informatics. Her teaching includes
undergraduate and graduate courses in information retrieval, digital
libraries, knowledge representation and markup languages. She has been
involved in research projects in the areas of cultural heritage,
multimedia databases and information retrieval. Currently her main
research interests are information retrieval, digital preservation and
the management of research data.


**Aleksandra Bradic-Martinovic (Serbia) **

Aleksandra Bradic-Martinovic, PhD is the Research Fellow at the
Institute of Economic Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia. Her field of expertize
is research of information and communication technology implementation
in economy, especially in banking, payment system operations and stock
exchange operations. Aleksandra is also engaged in education process in
Belgrade Banking Academy at the following subjects: E-banking and
Payment Systems, Stock Market Dealings and Management Information
Systems. She was engaged at several projects in the field of education.
At the FP7 SERSCIDA project she is a Serbia team coordinator.


**Anis Miladi (Tunisia) **

Anis Miladi earned his Bachelor degree in computer sciences and
multimedia in 2007 and a Master degree in Management of Information
Systems and organizations in 2008 and he is currently finalizing his
master degree in project management(projected date summer 2013). Before
joining the Social and Economic Survey Research Institute at Qatar
University as Survey Research technology specialist in 2009, he worked
as a programmer analyst in a private IT services company In Tunisia. His
Area of expertise includes managing computer assisted surveys
CAPI,CATI(Blaise surveying system)  in addition to Enterprise Document
Management Systems, Enterprise Portals (SharePoint).


**Lejla Somun-Krupalija (Sarajevo) **

Lejla currently serves as the Senior Program and Research Officer at the
Human Rights Centre of the University of Sarajevo. She has over 15 years
of experience in research, policy development in social inclusion
issues. She is the Project Coordinator of the SERSCIDA FP7 project that
aims to open data services/archives in the Western Balkan region in
cooperation with CESSDA members. She had been engaged in the NGO sector
previously, particularly on issues of capacity building and policy
development in the areas of gender equality, the rights of persons with
disabilities and issues of social inclusion and forced migration. She
teaches academic writing, qualitative research, and gender and
nationalism at the University of Sarajevo. 

