+++
nid = "7829"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IASSIST Quarterly Volume 42:3 now available!"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iassist-quarterly-volume-423-now-available"
date = "2018-12-13 11:50:46 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
## Editor's notes:  *Digital curation after digital extraction for data
sharing*

Welcome to the third issue of volume 42 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
42:3, 2018).

The IASSIST Quarterly presents in this issue three papers from
geographically widespread countries. We call IASSIST 'International', so
I am happy to present papers from three continents in this issue with
papers from Zimbabwe, Italy and Canada.

The paper 'The State of Preparedness for Digital Curation and
Preservation: A Case Study of a Developing Country Academic Library' is
by Phillip Ndhlovu, who works as the institutional repository librarian
and liaison librarian, and Thomas Matingwina, who is a lecturer at the
Department of Library and Information Service at the National University
of Science and Technology (NUST) in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe. Modern day
libraries have vast amounts of digital content and the authors noted
that because these collections require very different management than
the traditional paper-based materials, the new materials' longevity is
endangered. Their study assessed the state of preparedness of the NUST
Library for digital curation and preservation, including the assessment
of awareness, competencies, technology infrastructure, digital disaster
preparedness, and challenges to digital curation and preservation. They
found a lack of policies, lack of expertise by library staff, and lack
of funding.

You might conclude that investigating your own organization and reaching
the very well known conclusion that 'we need more money!' is not so
surprising. However, you have to take note that the Jeff Rothenberg
statement from 1995 that 'Digital information lasts forever -- or five
years, whichever comes first' has not yet sunk in with politicians and
administrators, who will immediately associate the term 'digital' with
'saving money'. This study shows them why this is not a valid
connotation. It is a study of a single institution, and as the authors
note it cannot be generalized even to other academic libraries in
Zimbabwe. However, other libraries - also outside Zimbabwe - have here a
good guide for making their own assessment of the digital preparedness
of their institution. 

The second paper was - as was the paper above - presented at the IASSIST
conference in 2018 and is also about the transition from media known for
thousands of years to new media and digital forms. Peter Peller
presented the paper 'From Paper Map to Geospatial Vector Layer:
Demystifying the Process'. He is the Director of the Spatial and
Numeric Data Services unit at Libraries and Cultural Resources at the
University of Calgary in Canada. 

The conversion of raster images of maps to vector data is analogous to
OCR technologies extracting words from scanned print documents. Thereby
the map information becomes more accessible, and usable in geographic
information systems (GIS). An illustrative example is that historical
geospatial information can be overlaid in Google Earth. The description
of the entire process incorporates examples of the various techniques,
including different types of editing. Furthermore, descriptions of the
software used in selected studies are listed in the appendix. It is
mentioned that 'paper texture and ink spread' can be responsible for
introducing noise and errors, so remember to keep the old maps. This is
because what is considered noise in one context might become the subject
for interesting future research. In addition the software for extracting
information will most certainly improve.

For once both the author and we at IASSIST Quarterly have been quite
fast. The data for the third paper was collected in late 2017 and the
results are presented here only a year later. In October 2017 a message
appeared on the IASSIST mail list with the start of the sentence 'I
would share the data but...' It quickly generated many ways of
completing that sentence. Flavio Bonifacio - who works at Metis Ricerche
srl in Torino, Italy - quickly launched a questionnaire sent to members
of the mail list and to others from similar communities of interested
individuals. The questionnaire was an extension of an earlier one
concerning scientists' reuse and sharing of data. The paper includes
many tabulations and models showing the background as well as the data
sharing attitudes found in the survey. A respondent typology is
developed based upon the level of propensity for sharing data and the
level of experiencing problems in data sharing into a 2-by-2 table
consisting of 'irreducible reluctant', 'reducible reluctant',
'problematic follower', and 'premium follower'.    

In the Nordic countries we tend to have the impression that certain
services are publicly available and for free. This impression is plainly
superficial because we Nordic people also know very well that 'there is
no such thing as a free lunch'! All services must be paid for in one
way or another. If you have many services that carry no direct cost, it
is probably because you - and others - paid for them beforehand through
taxation. Because of cuts in the public economy one of the things Flavio
Bonifacio wanted to investigate was the question 'Is there a market for
selling data-sharing services?' The results imply that 'reducible
reluctants' can be a target for services that reduce the problems of
that group.

Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and
workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for the
IQ. When you are preparing such a presentation, give a thought to
turning your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. Doing
that after the event also gives you the opportunity of improving your
work after feedback. We encourage you to login or create an author login
to <https://www.iassistquarterly.com> (our Open Journal System
application). We permit authors 'deep links' into the IQ as well as
deposition of the paper in your local repository. Chairing a conference
session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a
special issue IQ is also much appreciated as the information reaches
many more people than the limited number of session participants and
will be readily available on the IASSIST Quarterly website at
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com>.  Authors are very welcome to take a
look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: <kbr@sam.sdu.dk>.
Should you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as
guest editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - November 2018
