+++
nid = "7498"
uid = "765"
author = "LHorton 2"
title = "#IDCC17: Notes from the International Digital Curation Conference 2017"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals",]
oldpath = "/blog/idcc17-notes-international-digital-curation-conference-2017"
date = "2017-04-03 08:45:55 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
For the third time IASSIST sponsored the International Digital Curation
Conference. This time allowing three students, one each from
Switzerland, Korea, and Canada to attend the conference, which titled
itself "Upstream, Downstream: embedding digital curation workflows for
data science, scholarship and society".

Data science was a strong theme of the three keynote presentations, in
particular how curation and data management are an active, integrated,
ongoing parts of analysis rather than a passive epilogue in research.

[Maria
Wolters](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/Maria%20Wolters%20Digital%20Curation%20Keynote.pdf)
talked about how missing data can provide research insights analysing
patterns of absence and, counter-intuitively, can improve the quality of
datasets through the concept of managed forgetting --asking is it
important to preserve and is it relevant at the moment -- we can better
manage and find data. [Alice
Daish](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/DataDrivenMuseumsAliceDaishIDCC17.pdf)
showed her work as a data scientist at the British Museum, with the goal
of enabling data informed decision-making. This involved identifying
data "silos" and "wrangling" data in to exportable formats, along
with zealous use and promotion of R, but also thinking about the way
data is communicated to management. [Chris
Williams](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/idcc17williams.pdf)
demonstrated how the [Alan Turing](https://www.turing.ac.uk/) Institute
handles data mining. He reports that about 80 percent of work on data
mining involves understanding and preparing data. This ranges from
understanding formats and running descriptives to look for outliers and
anomalies to cleaning untidy and inconsistent metadata and coding. The
aim is to automate as much of this as possible with the [Automatic
Statistician](https://www.automaticstatistician.com/index/) project.

In a session on data policies, University of Toronto's [Dylanne
Dearborn and Leanne
Trimble](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/TrimbleDearbornIDCC2017-2.pdf)
showed how libraries can use creative thinking to matching publication
patterns against journal data policies in providing support. [Fieke
Schoots](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/IDCC17_Schoots_20170222.pdf)
outlined the approach at Leiden which includes requirements from PhD's
to state location of research data before their defence can take place
and twenty year retention for Data Management Plans. Switching to
journals, [Ian
Hrynaszkiewicz](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/IDCC_SN_Data_policy_Feb2017.pdf)
talked about the work Springer Nature has done to standardise journal
data polices into one of four types allied with support for authors and
editors on policy identification and implementation.

[Ruth
Geraghty](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/RGeraghty-Ethics.pdf)
dealt with ethical challenges in retro-fitting a data set for sharing.
She introduced the Children's Research Network for Ireland and Northern
Ireland. This involved attempting to obtain consent from participants
for sharing, but also work on anonymising the data to enable sharing.
Although a problematic and resource intensive endeavour the result is
not only a reusable data set but informed guidance for other projects on
archiving and sharing. Niamh Moore has long experience of archiving her
research and focused on another legacy archive -- the [Clayoquot
Lives](http://clayoquotlives.sps.ed.ac.uk/) oral history project. Niamh
is using [Omeka](http://omeka.org/) as a sharing platform because it
gives the researcher control of how the data can be presented for reuse.
For example, Omeka has capacity for creating exhibits to showcase
themes.

Community is important in both curation and management. [Marta
Teperek](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/PRE_IDCC12Teperek_V1_20170220.pdf)
and [Rosie
Higman](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/PRE_HigmanIDCC_V3_20170221.pdf)
introduced work at Cambridge on collaborative communities and data
champions. Finding a top-down compliance approach was not working,
Cambridge moved to a bottom-up engagement style bringing researchers
into decision-making on policies and support. Data champions are a new
approach to seed advocates and trainers around the university as local
contact points, based on a community of practice model. The rewards of
this approach are potentially rich, but the cost of setting-up and
managing it are high and the behaviour of the community is not always
controllable. Two presentations on community/citizen science from
[Andrea
Copeland](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/copeland_IDCC%202017.pdf)
and [Peter
Darch](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/files/blog/Darch%20IDCC.pdf)
also hit on the theme of controlling groups in curating data. The
[Galaxy Zoo](https://www.galaxyzoo.org/) project found there were
lessons to learn about the behaviour of volunteers, particularly the
negative impact of a "league table" credit system in retaining
contributors, and how volunteers expected to only contribute
classifications were in some cases doing data science work in noticing
unusual objects.

A topic of relevance to social science focused curation is sensitive
data. [Debra Hiom](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2451) introduced
University of Bristol's method of providing safe access to sensitive
data. Once again, it's resource intensive - requiring a committee
classification of data into levels of access and process reviews to
ensure applications are genuine. However the result is that data that
cannot be open can be shared responsibly. [Sebastian
Karcher](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2449) from the Qualitative Data
Archive spoke about managing sensitive data in the cloud, a task further
complicated by the lack of a federal data protection law in the United
States. [Elizabeth Hull](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2450) (Dryad)
presented on developing an ethical framework for curating social media
data. A common perception is social media posts are fair use, if made
public. However, from an ethical perspective posters may not understand
their "data" is being collected for research purposes and users need
to know that use of @ or # on Twitter means they are inviting
involvement and sharing in wider discussions. Hull offered a "STEP"
approach as way to deal with social media data, balancing benefit of
preservation and sharing against risk of harm and reasonable consent
from research subjects.
