+++
nid = "7152"
uid = "856"
author = "ESmith"
title = "Interested in the “data revolution” and what it means for research? Here’s why you should attend IASSIST2016"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "IASSIST Conferences", "Data-related Advocacy", "Data Access & Open Data", "Professional Development", "Data Archives and Service Providers", "Europe", "Social Science Datasets", "IASSIST 2016", "Tools, Apps, Technology", "News and Announcements",]
oldpath = "/blog/interested-%E2%80%9Cdata-revolution%E2%80%9D-and-what-it-means-research-here%E2%80%99s-why-you-should-attend-iassist201"
date = "2016-05-03 02:15:18 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/data_computer.jpg"
+++
{{< figure src="/img/blog/data_computer.jpg" class="wrap" alt="data." >}}

### Part 1: Data sharing, new data sources and data protection {#part-1-data-sharing-new-data-sources-and-data-protection dir="ltr"}

[IASSIST ](http://iassistdata.org)is an international organisation of
information technology and data services professionals which aims to
provide support to research and teaching in the social sciences. It has
over 300 members ranging from data archive staff and librarians to
statistical agencies, government departments and non-profit
organisations.

The theme of this year's conference is **"Embracing the 'data
revolution': opportunities and challenges for research"** and it is the
42nd of its kind, taking place every year.
[IASSIST2016](http://iassist2016.org) will take place in Bergen, Norway,
from 31 May to 3 June, hosted by [NSD](http://www.nsd.uib.no) -
Norwegian Centre for Research Data.

Here is a first snapshot of what is there and why it is important.

### Data sharing {#data-sharing dir="ltr"}

If you have ever wondered whether data sharing is to the advantage of
researchers, there will be a session led by [Utrecht University
Library](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=44)
exploring the matter. The first results of a survey which explores
personal beliefs, intention and behaviour regarding the sharing of data
will also be presented by
[GESIS](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=53).
The relationship between data sharing and data citation, relatively
overlooked until now, will then be addressed by the [Australian Data
Archive](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=79).

If you are interested in how a data journal could incentivise
replications in economics, you should think about attending a session by
[ZBW Leibniz Information Centre for
Economics](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=9)
which will present some studies describing the outcome of replication
attempts and discuss the meaning of failed replications in economics.

[GESIS](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=54)
will then look into improving research data sharing by addressing
different scholarly target groups such as individual researchers,
academic institutions, or scientific journals, all of which place
diverse demands on a data sharing tool. They will focus on the tools
offered by GESIS as well as a joint tool, "SowiDataNet", offered
together with the Social Science Centre Berlin, the German Institute for
Economic Research, and the German National Library of Economic.

The [UKDA and UKDS
](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=75)will
present a paper which seeks to explore the role that case studies of
research can play in regard to effective data sharing, reuse and impact.

The Data Archive in Finland
([FSD](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=116))
will also be presented as a case study of an archive that is broadening
its services to the health sciences and humanities, disciplines in which
data sharing practices have not yet been established.

If you'd like to know more about data accessibility, which is being
required by journals and mandated by government funders, join a diverse
group of open data experts as IASSIST dives into open data dialogue that
includes presentations on [Open Data and Citizen
Empowerment](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=42)
and [101 Cool Things to do with Open
Data](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=57)
as part of the "Opening up on open data workshop." Presenters will be
from archives from across the globe.

### New data sources {#new-data-sources dir="ltr"}

A talk entitled "Data science: The future of social science?" by
[UKDA](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=58)
will introduce its conceptual and technical work in developing a big
data platform for social science and outline preliminary findings from
work using energy data.

If you have been wondering about the role of social media data in the
academic environment, the session by the [University of
California](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=64)
will include an overview of the social media data landscape and the
Crimson Hexagon product.

The three Vs of big data, volume, variety and velocity, are being
explored in the "Hybrid Data Lake" being built by
[UKDA](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=91)
using the Universal Decimal Classification platform and expanding
"topics" search while using big data management. Find out more about it
as well as possible future applications.

### Data protection

If you follow data protection issues, the panel on "Data protection:
legal and ethical reviews" is for you, starting off with a presentation
of the Administrative Data Research Network's
([ADRN](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=43))
Citizen's Panel, which look at public concerns about research using
administrative data, the content of which is both personal and
confidential. The ADRN was set up as part of the UK Government's Big
Data initiative as a UK-wide partnership between universities,
government bodies, national statistics authorities and the wider
research community.

The next
[ADRN](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=105)
presentation within this session will outline their application process
and the role of the Approvals Panel in relation to ethical review. The
aim is "to expand the discussion towards a broader reflection on the
ethical dilemmas that administrative data pose", as well as present some
steps taken to address these difficulties.

[NSD](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=152)
will then present the new EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
recently adopted at EU level, and explain how it will affect data
collection, data use, data preservation and data sharing. If you have
been wondering how the regulation will influence the possibilities for
processing personal data for research purposes, or how personal data are
defined, what conditions apply to an informed consent, or in which cases
it is legal and ethical to conduct research without the consent of the
data subjects, this presentation is for you.

### The big picture

Wednesday 1 June will kick-off with a plenary entitled "Data for
decision-makers: Old practice - new challenges" by Gudmund Hernes, the
current president of the International Social Science Council and
Norway's former Minister of Education and Research 1990-95, and Minister
of Health 1995-97.

The third day of the conference (2 June) will begin with a plenary -
"Embracing the 'Data Revolution': Opportunities and Challenges for
Research' or 'What you need to know about the data landscape to keep up
to date", by Matthew Woollard, Director of the UK Data Archive at the
University of Essex and Director of the UK Data Service.

If you want to know more about the three European projects under the
framework of the Horizon 2020 programme of the European Commission that
[CESSDA](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=45)
is involved in, one on big data ([Big Data
Europe](http://cessda.net/CESSDA-Services/Projects/BigDataEurope) -
Empowering Communities with Data Technologies), another on -
strengthening and widening the European infrastructure for social
science data archives ([CESSDA
SaW](http://cessda.net/CESSDA-Services/Projects/CESSDA-SaW)) and a third
on synergies for Europe's Research Infrastructures in the Social
Sciences ([SERISS](http://cessda.net/CESSDA-Services/Projects/SERISS)),
this panel is for you.  

["Don't Hate the Player, Hate the Game": Strategies for Discussing
and Communicating Data Services"
](https://www.openconf.org/IASSIST16/modules/request.php?module=oc_program&action=summary.php&id=70)considers
how libraries might strategically reconsider communications about data
services.

Keep an eye on this blog for more news in the run-up to IASSIST2016.

Find out more on the [IASSIST2016 website](http://iassist2016.org).

Spread the word on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/CESSDA_Data/status/727430588286795776) using
[#IASSIST16](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23IASSIST16&src=typd).

We are looking forward to seeing you in Bergen! 


A story by Eleanor Smith ([CESSDA](http://cessda.net/))
