+++
nid = "6948"
uid = "643"
author = "LHorton"
title = "International Digital Curation Conference 2016 (IDCC16)"
tags = [ "External Events",]
oldpath = "/blog/international-digital-curation-conference-2016-idcc16-0"
date = "2016-03-07 04:05:45 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
The [International Digital Curation Conference
2016](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/events/idcc16) was in Amsterdam between 23-24
February.

IASSIST was again a sponsor, and presented a
[poster](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2121) on IASSIST members'
activities. In addition, plenty of familiar faces were present including
our current IASSIST president and three former ones.

This year's conference was the eleventh IDCC and took the title of
"Visible data, invisible infrastructure". This asks what can we do to
make the hard work of preserving data and making it and keeping it
usable as easy as possible for researchers to use and as unobtrusive as
possible in their work.

One feature of this year's conference was the importance of terminology.
In his opening keynote, [Barend
Mons](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2158) made a good point that
accessible data is not open data and sharing data does not make it
reusable. Reusable is what is important. In his plenary, [Andrew
Sallans](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2159) spoke of openness and
sharing as core to scientific activity. His presentation was insightful
on how data is lost (paywalls, broken links, TIF walls), as was his call
for five percent of research budgets be reserved for data stewardship
and the need for Europe to train 500,000 data experts in the next
decade. The final keynote from [Susan
Halford](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2160) was a warning about
sloppy research methodology as researchers gorge on new big data
sources. Using social media as an example, she cautioned on how these
are not "naturally occurring" data but mediated by private companies
using methods we do not know about.

The rest of the conference split into concurrent sessions with either a
national or institutional focus, or featuring demonstrations and
elaborations on tools and services. It is interesting to see how
ventures like [Dataverse](http://dataverse.org/) and
[DMPonline](https://dmponline.dcc.ac.uk/)/[Tool](http://dmp.cdlib.org/)
fit into national infrastructure initiatives like [Australian National
Data Service](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2179) or Canada's
[Portage](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2183) and institutional ones
like those demonstrated by the universities of
[Oxford](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2201) and California. If they
are to do so successfully, it will be with a vison of enabling
researchers to do better science rather than compelling researchers to
comply with bureaucracy, and that the route to achieving this will be
through open standards and building on existing initiatives rather than
going back to constructing new tools to do essentially the same job.

An impressive feature of IDCC is the methodological rigour applied to
research papers. An example to highlight from the programme was Renata
Curty's research on [Factors influencing research data reuse in social
sciences](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/webfm_send/2162).

The final notable aspect of IDCC16 was how almost none of the
suggestions in keynotes and tools presented supported "traditional"
academic publishing. Reuse needs discoverable, machine readable,
contextualised data with minimal barriers to access and minimal limits
on usage -- not the business model on which some well-known academic
publishers thrive.

All presentations, posters, demonstrations, as well as blogs reporting
on IDCC16 can be found on the DCC
[website](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/events/idcc16).
