+++
nid = "8105"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IQ 43(4) available!"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iq-434-available"
date = "2020-01-08 13:37:33 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
Welcome to the fourth issue of volume 43 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ 43:4, 2019).

The first article is authored by Jessica Mozersky, Heidi Walsh, Meredith
Parsons, Tristan McIntosh, Kari Baldwin, and James M. DuBois -- all
located at the Bioethics Research Center, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri in USA. They ask the question "Are we
ready to share qualitative research data?", with the subtitle "Knowledge
and preparedness among qualitative researchers, IRB Members, and data
repository curators." The subtitle indicates that their research
includes a survey of key personnel related to scientific data sharing.
The report is obtained through semi-structured in-depth interviews with
30 data repository curators, 30 qualitative researchers, and 30 IRB
staff members in the USA. IRB stands for Institutional Review Board,
which in other countries might be called research ethics committee or
similar. There is generally an increasing trend towards data sharing and
open science, but qualitative data are rarely shared. The dilemma behind
this reluctance to share is exemplified by health data where qualitative
methods explore sensitive topics. The sensitivity leads to protection of
confidentiality, which hinders keeping sufficient contextual detail for
secondary analyses. You could add that protection of confidentiality is
a much bigger task in qualitative data, where sensitive information can
be hidden in every corner of the data, that consequently must be
fine-combed, while with quantitative data most decisions concerning
confidentiality can be made at the level of variables. The reporting in
the article gives insights into the differences between the three
stakeholder groups. An often-found answer among researchers is that data
sharing is associated with quantitative data, while IRB members have
little practice with qualitative. Among curators, about half had curated
qualitative data, but many only worked with quantitative data. In
general, qualitative data sharing lacks guidance and standards.

The second article also raises a question: "How many ways can we teach
data literacy?" We are now in Asia with a connection to the USA. The
author Yun Dai is working at the Library of New York University
Shanghai, where they have explored many ways to teach data literacy to
undergraduate students. These initiatives, described in the article,
included workshops and in-class instruction - which tempted students by
offering up-to-date technology, through online casebooks of topics in
the data lifecycle, to event series with appealing names like "Lying
with Data." The event series had a marketing mascot - a "Lying with
Data" Pinocchio - and sessions on being fooled by advertisements and
getting the truth out of opinion surveys. Data literacy has a
resemblance to information literacy and in that perspective, data
literacy is defined as "critical thinking applied to evaluating data
sources and formats, and interpreting and communicating findings," while
statistical literacy is "the ability to evaluate statistical information
as evidence." The article presents the approaches and does not conclude
on the question, "How many?" No readers will be surprised by the missing
answer, and I am certain readers will enjoy the ideas of the article and
the marketing focus.

With the last article "Examining barriers for establishing a national
data service," the author Janez Štebe takes us to Europe. Janez Štebe is
head of the social science data archives (Arhiv Družboslovnih Podatkov)
at the University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. The Consortium of European
Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) is a distributed European social
science data infrastructure for access to research data. CESSDA has many - but not all - European countries as members. The focus is on the
situation in 20 non-CESSDA member European countries, with emerging and
immature data archive services being developed through such projects as
the CESSDA Strengthening and Widening (SaW 2016 and 2017) and CESSDA
Widening Activities (WA 2018). By identifying and comparing gaps and
differences, a group of countries at a similar level may consider
following similar best practice examples to achieve a more mature and
supportive open scientific data ecosystem. Like the earlier articles,
this article provides good references to earlier literature and
description of previous studies in the area. In this project 22
countries were selected, all CESSDA non-members, and interviewees among
social science researchers and data librarians were contacted with an
e-mail template between October 2018 and January 2019. The article
brings results and discussion of the national data sharing culture and
data infrastructure. Yes, there is a lack of money! However, it is the
process of gradually establishing a robust data infrastructure that is
believed to impact the growth of a data sharing culture and improve the
excellence and the efficiency of research in general.

Submissions of papers for the *IASSIST Quarterly* are always very
welcome. We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences
and workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for
the *IQ*. When you are preparing such a presentation, give a thought to
turning your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. Doing
that after the event also gives you the opportunity of improving your
work after feedback. We encourage you to login or create an author login
to <https://www.iassistquarterly.com> (our Open Journal System
application). We permit authors to "deep link" into the *IQ* as well as
to deposit the paper in your local repository. Chairing a conference
session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a
special issue *IQ* is also much appreciated as the information reaches
many more people than the limited number of session participants and
will be readily available on the *IASSIST Quarterly* website at
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com>.  Authors are very welcome to take a
look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: <kbr@sam.sdu.dk>.
Should you be interested in compiling a special issue for the *IQ* as
guest editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - December 2019
