+++
nid = "8053"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IQ 43(3) Available:  As open as possible and as closed as needed"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iq-433-available-open-possible-and-closed-needed"
date = "2019-09-27 05:18:42 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
Welcome to the third issue of volume 43 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
43:3, 2019).

Yes, we are open! Open data is good. Just a click away. Downloadable
24/7 for everybody. An open government would make the decisionmakers'
data open to the public and the opposition. As an example, communal data
on bicycle paths could be open, so more navigation apps would flourish
and embed the information in maps, which could suggest more safe bicycle
routes. However, as demonstrated by all three articles in this IQ issue,
very often research data include information that requires restrictions
concerning data access. The second paper states that data should be 'as
open as possible and as closed as needed'. This phrase originates from a
European Union Horizon 2020 project called the Open Research Data Pilot,
in 'Guidelines on FAIR Data Management in Horizon 2020' (July 2016).
Some data need to be closed and not freely available. So once more it
shows that a simple solution of total openness and one-size-fits-all is
not possible. We have to deal with more complicated schemes depending on
the content of data. Luckily, experienced people at data institutions
are capable of producing adapted solutions. 

The first article 'Restricting data's use: A spectrum of concerns in
need of flexible approaches' describes how data producers have
legitimate needs for restricting data access for users. This
understanding is quite important as some users might have an automatic
objection towards all restrictions on use of data. The authors Dharma
Akmon and Susan Jekielek are at ICPSR at the University of Michigan.
ICPSR has been a U.S. research archive since 1962, so they have much
practice in long-term storage of digital information. From a short-term
perspective you might think that their primary task is to get the data
in use and thus would be opposed to any kind of access restrictions.
However, both producers and custodians of data are very well aware of
their responsibility for determining restrictions and access. The caveat
concerns the potential harm through disclosure, often exemplified by
personal data of identifiable individuals. The article explains how
dissemination options differ in where data are accessed and what is
required for access. If you are new to IASSIST, the article also gives
an excellent short introduction to ICPSR and how this institution guards
itself and its users against the hazards of data sharing.

In the second article 'Managing data in cross-institutional projects',
the reader gains insight into how FAIR data usage benefits a
cross-institutional project. The starting point for the authors - Zaza
Nadja Lee Hansen, Filip Kruse, and Jesper Boserup Thestrup -- is the
FAIR principles that data should be: findable, accessible,
interoperable, and re-useable. The authors state that this implies that
the data should be as open as possible. However, as expressed in the
ICPSR article above, data should at the same time be as closed as
needed. Within the EU, the mention of GDPR (General Data Protection
Regulation) will always catch the attention of the economical
responsible at any institution because data breaches can now be very
severely fined. The authors share their experience with implementation
of the FAIR principles with data from several cross-institutional
projects. The key is to ensure that from the beginning there is
agreement on following the specific guidelines, standards and formats
throughout the project. The issues to agree on are, among other things,
storage and sharing of data and metadata, responsibilities for updating
data, and deciding which data format to use. The benefits of FAIR data
usage are summarized, and the article also describes the
cross-institutional projects. The authors work as a senior
consultant/project manager at the Danish National Archives, senior
advisor at The Royal Danish Library, and communications officer at The
Royal Danish Library. The cross-institutional projects mentioned here
stretch from Kierkegaard's writings to wind energy.

While this issue started by mentioning that ICPSR was founded in 1962,
we end with a more recent addition to the archive world, established at
Qatar University's Social and Economic Survey Research Institute (SESRI)
in 2017. The paper 'Data archiving for dissemination within a Gulf
nation' addresses the experience of this new institution in an
environment of cultural and political sensitivity. With a positive view
you can regard the benefits as expanding. The start is that archive
staff get experience concerning policies for data selection,
restrictions, security and metadata. This generates benefits and expands
to the broader group of research staff where awareness and improvements
relate to issues like design, collection and documentation of studies.
Furthermore, data sharing can be seen as expanding in the Middle East
and North Africa region and generating a general improvement in the
relevance and credibility of statistics generated in the region. Again,
the FAIR principles of findable, accessible, interoperable, and
re-useable are gaining momentum and being adopted by government offices
and data collection agencies. In the article, the story of SESRI at
Qatar University is described ahead of sections concerning data sharing
culture and challenges as well as issues of staff recruitment,
architecture and workflow. Many of the observations and considerations
in the article will be of value to staff at both older and infant
archives. The authors of the paper are the senior researcher and lead
archivist at the archive of the Qatar University Brian W. Mandikiana,
and Lois Timms-Ferrara and Marc Maynard -- CEO and director of
technology at Data Independence (Connecticut, USA). 

Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and
workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for the
IQ. When you are preparing such a presentation, give a thought to
turning your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. Doing
that after the event also gives you the opportunity of improving your
work after feedback. We encourage you to login or create an author login
to https://www.iassistquarterly.com (our Open Journal System
application). We permit authors 'deep links' into the IQ as well as
deposition of the paper in your local repository. Chairing a conference
session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a
special issue IQ is also much appreciated as the information reaches
many more people than the limited number of session participants and
will be readily available on the IASSIST Quarterly website at
https://www.iassistquarterly.com.  Authors are very welcome to take a
look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: <kbr@sam.sdu.dk>.
Should you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as
guest editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - September 2019
