+++
nid = "8035"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "IQ 43(1):  Standardization and certification save us from the frustrations of the Greek drama"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iq-431-standardization-and-certification-save-us-frustrations-greek-drama"
date = "2019-05-13 05:49:55 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
Welcome to the first issue of volume 43 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
43:1, 2019).

The IASSIST Quarterly presents in this issue three papers illustrated in
the title above. Chronologically we start from an early beginning. No,
not with Turing, we time travel further back and experience ancient
Greece. In this submission the Greek drama delivers the form, while data
librarians deliver the content on data sharing. And it makes you a proud
IASSISTer to know that altruism is the rationale behind data sharing.
The drama continues in the second submission when librarians get
frustrated because they suddenly find themselves first as data
librarians and second as frustrated data librarians because ends do not
meet when the librarians have difficulties servicing the data needs of
their users, in combination with the users having unrealistic
expectations. Finally, the third article is about standardization and
certification that makes the librarians more secure that they are on the
right track when building a TDR (Trustworthy Digital Repository). Enjoy
the reading.

The first article is different from most articles. There is a first for
everything! Not often are we at IQ offered a Greek drama. And here is
one on data sharing. The article needed the layout of a play so even the
typeface of this contribution is different. The paper / play is called
'An epic journey in sharing: The story of a young researcher's journey
to share her data and the information professionals who tried to help'.
The authors are Sebastian Karcher and Sophia Lafferty-Hess at Duke
University Libraries. The reason for using Greek drama as a template is
that form can help us think differently - 'out of the box'! The play
demonstrates the positive intention of data sharing, and by sharing
contributing to something larger. The article references other
researchers showing that scholarly altruism is a driving force for data
sharers. No matter the good intentions of the protagonist, she finds
herself locked in a situation where she is not able to take identifiable
data with her when leaving the institution. And leaving the university
is what undergraduates do. Without the identification, it is impossible
to obtain re-consent from participants. Yes, it does look murky but
there is even a happy ending in the epilogue.  

The second article is about librarianship, and how that task is not
always easy. 'Frustrations and roadblocks in data reference
librarianship' is by Alicia Kubas and Jenny McBurney who work at the
University of Minnesota Libraries. Like many others, they have observed
that many librarians find themselves as 'accidental data librarians'.
That this brings frustration can be seen in the results of a survey they
carried out. The methodology is explained, and descriptive statistics
bring insight to what librarians do as well as to the frustrations and
roadblocks they experience. Let us start with the good news: some
librarians are never frustrated with data questions. The bad news is
that only 3% fall into that category. On the other hand, 83% mention
'managing patron expectations' among their biggest frustrations. It
sounds as if matching of expectations should be a course at library
school. Maybe it is already, and users with high expectations simply do
not understand the complexity of the work involved. Fortunately, some
frustrations can be lessened by experience, but there are others --
called roadblocks, e.g. paywalls or lack of geographic coverage ­-- that
all librarians meet. Among the comments after the survey was that data
persist as a difficult source type for librarians to support. The
questionnaire developed and used by Kubas and McBurney is found in an
appendix.

The last article in this issue raises sustainability as an important
issue for long term data preservation, and the concept forms part of the
title of the submission 'CoreTrustSeal: From academic collaboration to
sustainable services'. The paper is from an international group of
authors comprising Hervé L'Hours, Mari Kleemola, and Lisa de Leeuw from
UK, Finland and the Netherlands. The seal is a certification for
repositories curating data. The last sentence in the abstract sums up
the content of the paper: 'As well as providing a historical narrative
and current and future perspectives, the CoreTrustSeal experience offers
lessons for those involved in developing standards and best practices or
seeking to develop cooperative and community-driven efforts bridging
data curation activities across academic disciplines, governmental and
private sectors'. In order to attain CoreTrustSeal TDR certification
and become a Trustworthy Digital Repository (TDR), the repository has to
fulfil 16 requirements and the CoreTrustSeal foundation maintains these
requirements and the audit procedures. The certification draws on
preservation standards and models as found in Open Archival Information
Systems and in the catalogues of ISO and DIN standards. The authors
emphasize that the CoreTrustSeal is founded on and developed in a spirit
of openness and community. The paper's sharing of the experience
follows that spirit.  

Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and
workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for the
IQ. When you are preparing such a presentation, give a thought to
turning your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. Doing
that after the event also gives you the opportunity of improving your
work after feedback. We encourage you to login or create an author login
to https://www.iassistquarterly.com (our Open Journal System
application). We permit authors 'deep links' into the IQ as well as
deposition of the paper in your local repository. Chairing a conference
session with the purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a
special issue IQ is also much appreciated as the information reaches
many more people than the limited number of session participants and
will be readily available on the IASSIST Quarterly website at
https://www.iassistquarterly.com.  Authors are very welcome to take a
look at the instructions and layout:

<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>

Authors can also contact me directly via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should
you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest
editor(s) I will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen - May 2019
