+++
nid = "1088"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "Special Double Issue of IQ on Data Documentation Initiative"
tags = [ "Metadata & Standards", "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iq-ddi-special"
date = "2010-11-28 10:44:46 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-2.jpg"
+++
### Guest Editors Notes - Mary Vardigan and Joachim Wackerow

Welcome to a special double issue of the IASSIST Quarterly featuring
articles focused on the Data Documentation Initiative (DDI), a metadata
standard for the social sciences. We are proud to present these six
articles, which explore various projects related to DDI 3 and its
enhanced features.

The articles draw on previous presentations and papers created in
connection with the 2009 "Expert Workshop on Implementation of DDI3 --
Advanced Topics" held in Wadern, Germany; the 2009 European DDI Users
Group (EDDI) meeting held in Bonn, Germany; and the IASSIST conferences
held in Tampere, Finland (2009) and Ithaca, New York, USA (2010).

Jeremy Iverson's article on metadata-driven survey design highlights the
reuse of metadata starting at the very beginning of the research data
life cycle and also discusses the benefits of using metadata to drive
the process of collecting, visualizing, and analyzing survey data. This
is a powerful and efficient approach that should be taught in survey
methods courses in order to save costs and to enable data producers to
leverage the metadata they create across the life course of research
data.

Also related to data collection is the article on the Questasy online
survey documentation tool by Marika de Bruijne and Alerk Amin. Questasy
permits internal users to document longitudinal data and to make this
documentation available to external users on the Web. A benefit of DDI 3
for this system is that it facilitates tracking of Question Items across
waves in the study, where each wave can have Question Constructs and
Variables that refer to the same Question Item. This system was
developed for the LISS panel online survey at the University of Tilburg
in the Netherlands.

"Implementing DDI 3: The German Microcensus Case Study" by Andias
Wira-Alam and Oliver Hopt looks at using DDI 3 to document the German
Microcensus through a customized DDI 3 editor and a Web view providing
different perspectives for the end users based on the same DDI 3 items.
Interestingly, Andias and Oliver discuss basing some of their decisions
about software design on Jannik and Dan's use case describing the
development of the DDI 3 metadata authoring tool -- see Building a
Modular DDI 3 Editor.

"Metadata Creation, Transformation and Discovery for Social Science Data
Management: The DAMES Project Infrastructure" by Jesse M. Blum, Guy C.
Warner, Simon B. Jones, Paul S. Lambert, Alison S. F. Dawson, Koon Leai
Larry Tan, and Kenneth J. Turner shows the wide variety of data
management tasks that DDI 3 can support and document, including recodes,
merging, and data cleaning. Using DDI 3 to document these phases of the
data life cycle is an exciting development.

"DDI 3 Development at DDA" by Jannik Jensen and Dan Kristiansen of the
Danish Data Archive provides a fascinating look into the development of
an authoring tool for DDI metadata, a tool that is being designed to
play a central role in the work flow at the DDA archive. It focuses as
well on the underlying reusable middleware and general considerations on
open source software development for DDI. This article provides the
reader with an up-close view of strategic decisions made at DDA to
incorporate the functionality of DDI 3 into the architecture of the DDA
archive.

With its focus on machine-actionability and data typing, DDI 3 needs a
strong system of controlled vocabularies to supplement the creation of
metadata. The article on controlled vocabularies by Taina Jääskeläinen,
Meinhard Moschner, and Joachim Wackerow presents the case for using
controlled vocabularies and the ways in which they benefit the user. The
article also showcases the work of the DDI Controlled Vocabularies Group
and its efforts to create vocabularies for DDI 3, which will be made
available as separate products using a format called Genericode.

We hope you enjoy reading these articles, and we offer our thanks to all
of the authors. We also want to express our appreciation to IASSIST for
the opportunity to publish this work in the IQ. We are grateful for the
ongoing support of the IASSIST community and its nurturance of DDI from
the very beginning.

[View IASSIST Quarterly Volume 33 Issue 1 & 2](/iq/issue/33/1) (2009:
Spring)
