+++
nid = "3021"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "IQ Special Quadruple Issue: The Book of the Bremen Workshop"
tags = [ "Archiving, Preservation, Curation", "Europe", "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/iq-special-quadruple-issue-book-bremen-workshop"
date = "2011-12-14 11:36:55 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/town_musicians_of_bremen-by-mitko-denev-on-flickr.jpg"
+++
Welcome to this [very special IASSIST Quarterly issue](/iq/issue/34/3). We now present volume 34 (3 & 4) of 2010 and volume 35 (1 & 2) of 2011. Normally we have about three papers in a single issue. In this super-mega-special issue we have fourteen papers from the countries: Finland, Ireland, United Kingdom, Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Norway, Slovenia, Belarus, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland and Switzerland. This will be known in IASSIST as the "The book of the Bremen Workshop".

{{< figure src="/img/blog/town_musicians_of_bremen-by-mitko-denev-on-flickr.jpg" title="Town musicians of bremen by Mitko Denev on flickr." >}}

The workshop took place in April 2009 at the University of Bremen. The
workshop was hosted by the Archive for Life Course Research at Bremen
and funded by the Timescapes Initiative with support from CESSDA. The
background and context of the workshop as well as short introductions to
the many papers are found in the Editorial Introduction by the guest
editors Bren Neale and Libby Bishop. The many papers are the result of
the effort of numerous authors that were instrumental in the development
and fulfillment of the many outcomes of the workshop. The introduction
by the guest editors shows impressive lists of short-term activities,
agreed goals, and also strategies for development. There are future
initiatives and the future looks bright and interesting.The focus of the
Bremen Workshop is on "qualitative (Q) and qualitative longitudinal (QL)
research and resources across Europe". I would have called that a
qualitative workshop but you can see from the introduction and the
papers that this subject is often referred to as "qualitative and QL
data". The "and QL" emphasizes that the longitudinal aspect is the
special and important issue. In the beginning of IASSIST data was
equivalent to quantitative data. However, digital archives found in the
next wave that the qualitative data also with great value were made
available for secondary research. The aspect of "longitudinal" further
accentuates that value creation.

This is a growing subject area. During the processing one of the authors
wanted to update her paper and asked for us to replace the sentence "80
archived qualitative datasets and yearly around 30-40 datasets are
ordered for re-use" with "115 archived qualitative datasets and yearly
around 50-60 datasets are ordered for re-use". Yes, we do have a
somewhat long processing time but this is still a very fast growth rate.
I want to thank Libby Bishop for not being annoyed when I persistently
reminded her of the IQ special issues. I'm sure the guest editors with
similar persistency contacted the authors. It was worth it.

As in Sherlock Holmes we might look for what is not there as when
curiosity is raised by the fact that "the dog did not bark". IASSIST has
had and continues to have a majority of its membership in North America
so it is also remarkable that we here present the initiative on
"qualitative (Q) and qualitative longitudinal (QL) research" with a
European angle. Hopefully the rest of the world will enjoy these papers
and there will probably be more papers both from Europe but also from
the others regions covered by the IASSIST members.

Articles for the IQ are always very welcome. They can be papers from
IASSIST conferences or other conferences and workshops, from local
presentations or papers especially written for the IQ. If you don't have
anything to offer right now, then please prepare yourself for the next
IASSIST conference and start planning for participation in a session
there. Chairing a conference session with the purpose of aggregating and
integrating papers for a special issue IQ is much appreciated as the
information in the form of an IQ issue reaches many more people than the
session participants and will be readily available on the IASSIST
website at http://www.iassistdata.org.

Authors are very welcome to take a look at the description for layout and sending papers to the IQ: <https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>. Authors can also contact me via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should you be interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest editor (editors) I will also delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen
Editor August 2011

