+++
nid = "576"
uid = "12"
author = "Ann"
title = "New Version of US NSF Cyberinfrastructure Plan"
tags = [ "Reports & Studies",]
oldpath = "/blog/new-version-us-nsf-cyberinfrastructure-plan"
date = "2006-02-04 11:41:29 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
NSF'S CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE VISION FOR 21ST CENTURY DISCOVERY See:

http://www.nsf.gov/od/oci/ci_v5.pdf

Some sections of interest: p. 8: Support the development of the
computing professionals, interdisciplinary teams and new organizational
structures, such as virtual communities, needed to achieve the
scientific breakthroughs made possible by advanced CI, paying particular
attention to the opportunities to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups. NSF will continue to invest in understanding
how participants in its research and education communities, as well as
the scientific workforce, can use CI. For example, virtual organizations
empower communities of users to interact, exchange information and
access and share resources through tailored interfaces. Some of NSF's
investments will focus on appropriate mechanisms or structures for use,
while others will focus on how best to train future users of CI. NSF
will take advantage of the emerging communities associated with CI that
provide unique and special opportunities for broadening participation in
the science and engineering enterprise.

â€¢ Support state-of-the-art innovation in data management and
distribution systems, including digital libraries and educational
environments that are expected to contribute to many of the scientific
breakthroughs of the 21st century. NSF will foster communication between
forefront data management and distribution systems, digital libraries
and other education environments sponsored in its various directorates.
NSF will ensure that its efforts take advantage of innovation in large
data management and distribution activities sponsored by other agencies
and international efforts as well. These developments will play a
critical role in decisions that NSF makes about long-lived data.

p.17 B. Data Collections This document adopts the definition of data
collection types provided in the NSB report on Long-Lived Digital Data
Collections, where data collections are characterized as being one of
three functional types: â€¢ Research Collections. Authors are individual
investigators and investigator teams. Research collections are usually
maintained to serve immediate group participants only for the life of a
project, and are typically subjected to limited processing or curation.
Data may not conform to any data standards. â€¢ Resource Collections.
Resource Collections are authored by a community of investigators, often
within a domain of science or engineering, and are often developed with
community-level standards. Budgets are often intermediate in size.
Lifetime is between the mid- and long-term. â€¢ Reference Collections.
Reference collections are authored by and serve large segments of the
science and engineering community, and conform to robust,
well-established, comprehensive standards, which often lead to a
universal standard. Budgets are large and often derived from diverse
sources with a view to indefinite support. Boundaries between the types
are not rigid and collections originally established as research
collections may evolve over time to become resource and/or reference
collections. In this document, the term data collection is construed to
include one or more databases and their relevant technological
implementation. Data collections are managed by organizations and
individuals with the necessary expertise to structure them and to
support their effective use.

p. 17-19 Also contains references to ICPSR, RLG and NARA, etc. and
relationship to CI.

p. 20 Principles stated

and so on....

This May at our conference we will have a number of sessions, including
an opening plenary address by Dan Atkins, related to the issues raised
in these and other cyberinfrastructure initiatives.

Contributed by Ann Green
