+++
nid = "6400"
uid = "19"
author = "StuartM"
title = "New IQ now available!"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/new-iq-now-available"
date = "2015-06-01 02:03:56 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
**Editor notes:Â **

**Data, the whole Data, and nothing but the Data ... and the Metadata, and the Access to Data**

Welcome to the third issue of volume 38 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
38:3, 2014). This issue is unquestionably about data. There are three
papers on projects for improving delivery of data to users.

The first paper is 'Distributing Access to Data, not Data' by David
Schiller from the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) at Nuremberg
(Germany) and Richard Welpton at UK Data Archive, University of Essex
(UK). They focus on the problem that access to European microdata for
researchers is restricted by national borders and the barriers for
performing comparative analyses between the member states. The 'Data
without Boundaries' project now has an initiative to build a 'European
Remote Access Network' (EuRAN). The problem is that prevention of
identifying respondents in the microdata conflicts with the importance
for modern research methods of access to detailed data. Some control is
necessary and the paper describes remote access as the appropriate
answer in the forms of job submission, remote execution, and remote
desktop. As an example, one version of secure remote desktop access
encrypts pictures of the desktop screens to make secure the transport
over the Internet. The authors reference a set of principles for access,
e.g., that it is not desirable to physically move data and that access
should come through a single point that can access multiple sources of
data. The researchers' need to analyse the data is supported by a
'Virtual Research Environment' that includes software for generating and
presenting results through the EuRAN project.

The next paper presents a two-year metadata project based upon two
well-known series of studies: the American National Election Study
(ANES) and the US General Social Survey (GSS). The goal is to improve
their metadata and build demonstration tools to illustrate the value of
structured, machine-actionable metadata as reported in 'Creating Rich,
Structured Metadata: Lessons Learned in the Metadata Portal Project'.
The authors are Mary Vardigan (Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research (ICPSR)), Darrell Donakowski (American National
Election Studies (ANES), University of Michigan), Pascal Heus (Metadata
Technology North America (MTNA)), Sanda Ionescu (ICPSR), and Julia
Rotondo (NORC at University of Chicago). The article reports on their
experiences, and also includes recommendations. The National Science
Foundation funded the project under the 'Metadata for Long-standing
Large-Scale Social Science Surveys' (META-SSS) program. ICPSR and ANES
are co-distributors of most of the ANES studies while the GSS is
co-distributed by NORC, the Roper Center, and ICPSR. In the project
metadata tools revealed small differences between supposed identical
datasets, for instance in study titles, variable names, etc. The project
also decided which types of content to include. Both of the the series
are huge collections - as the 58 ANES surveys contain 79,521 variables
and the cumulative GSS has 5,558 variables. Marking up this legacy
documentation is laborious and time-intensive and the future naturally
lies in capturing the metadata at the source. In conclusion, the project
learned a great deal about converting legacy documentation and
identified several steps for documentation development, including the
areas of paradata and versions of datasets. The concept of versions of
datasets relates to the solution described in the first paper of not
bringing data but access to data to the users.

The third paper demonstrates further work in the project described
above. In the paper 'Mapping the General Social Survey to the Generic
Statistical Business Process Model: NORC's Experience' the three authors
- Scot Ausborn, Julia Rotondo, and Tim Mulcahy -- all from NORC at the
University of Chicago - present how they carried out the mapping of the
GSS workflow to the Generic Statistical Business Process Model (GSBPM).
An analysis of the business processes for the production of survey data
was carried out with the intention of direct capture of survey cycle
DDI-based metadata, thus avoiding the need to generate it retroactively.
The work is based upon an internal survey of GSS staff, asking them to
explicate their respective roles on the survey in terms of the GSBPM.
Connecting aspects of the GSS workflow to elements of the GSBPM produced
a comprehensive and integrative view of the individual efforts that
together produce the survey. Of the lessons learned, I noticed that they
later found that it may have been more fruitful to have held a workshop
in which GSS staff could discuss the workflow processes together, rather
than having a survey with each person providing his or her input in
isolation. They mention that they think an expert in GSBPM could have
conducted the mapping of the workflow; however they did identify points
for improvement in the workflow relating to both metadata and paradata.

Articles for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome. They can be
papers from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and workshops, from
local presentations or papers especially written for the IQ. When you
are preparing a presentation, give a thought to turning your one-time
presentation into a lasting contribution to continuing development. As
an author you are permitted 'deep links' where you link directly to your
paper published in the IQ. Chairing a conference session with the
purpose of aggregating and integrating papers for a special issue IQ is
also much appreciated as the information reaches many more people than
the session participants, and will be readily available on the IASSIST
website at <http://www.iassistdata.org>.

Authors are very welcome to take a look at the instructions and
layout: <https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>.

Authors can also contact me via e-mail: <kbr@sam.sdu.dk>. Should you be
interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest editor(s) I
will also be delighted to hear from you.


Karsten Boye Rasmussen
March 2015
Editor
