+++
nid = "658"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "New IQ!"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "Archiving, Preservation, Curation", "Data Access & Open Data", "Professional Development", "Data Citation", "News and Announcements", "Other Topics", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/new-iq"
date = "2009-03-26 08:35:15 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-2.jpg"
+++
The IASSIST Quarterly (IQ Vol. 31 issue 2 - 2007) is now available on
the web:

<http://iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iqvol31.html>

This issue will be printed and mailed to the membership. From next issue
IASSIST will be saving trees and only publish the IQ on the web. We hope
you agree with our decision. Thanks.


Some of you are now getting ready for the IASSIST conference in Tampere,
Finland 26.-29. of May. Remember if you are giving presentations that
you could write the presentation as an article for the IQ.


In this issue we have three papers from people working at the US Federal
Reserve Board. Viewed from posterity, it might look as if we at the IQ
were clairvoyant and in 2007 foresaw the global role for the FRB in the
financial crisis in the last quarter of 2008. The secret is first of all
the fact that volume 31-2 is the second issue of the 2007 volume but is
somewhat delayed, and we are writing in November 2008. Secondly, the
articles from the Federal Reserve Board carry opinions that "are of the
authors and not the Federal Reserve Board". As an author in the IQ you
are supported in expressing your opinions and not necessarily those of
your employer. Thirdly, these three articles are not about the financial
crisis, but hopefully some of the initiatives that are described in them
will help us in the current situation.


Linda F. Powell and Andrew Boettcher from the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (Washington, D.C.) are involved in the
collection, editing, storage, and dissemination of Commercial Bank
Reports of Income and Condition, and the use of the Extensible Business
Reporting Language (XBRL-format) for that purpose. Their article is
called "Modernizing Financial Data Collection with XBRL". XBRL can be
thought of as a set of accounting standards coupled with information
technology standards that simplifies the exchange of data. What was
earlier accomplished through a manual collection is now using XBRL for a
Call Report - a regulator-specified report for about 7,700 banks that
are required to file a quarterly report, containing over 2,000
variables. The article addresses the challenges: 1) multiple collection
and storage sites, 2) difficulties for the industry in implementing
changes to the data collection requirements, and 3) improvements to data
quality. This involves centralization in the new collection model by
submitting the data to the Central Data Repository. The article states
that "Financial theory suggests that more frequent, reliable, and
readable financial statement reports will result in a healthier
marketplace". Since the presentation of the article at the IASSIST 2008
conference in May we have experienced a financial crisis. Let us hope
for further refinements in this area as the XBRL is being used by
government regulators worldwide.


At the IASSIST 2008 conference Andrew Boettcher presented from the FRB a
metadata repository called the Data And News CataloguE (DANCE). The
article "Data and Knowledge Management at the Federal Reserve Board"
chronicles the role of DANCE in the organization and its transformation
into a knowledge management solution. When research projects were always
intra-departmental the departments tended to silo the data,
documentation, and expertise. Now, the number of multi-department
research projects is rising and more linking is needed. The DANCE
development staff then focused on the concepts: description, access
rights, contact information, and data location. One issue was that all
datasets needed to have standardized documentation. Each dataset has a
unique set of security requirements dictating usage rights, how access
is granted (request form), and publication rights. The article also
addresses the searching of datasets and the additional feature of
allowing user-generated content supported by wiki-pages for the dataset.

As the electronic information environment is shifting, the presentation
of information from the Federal Reserve Board is becoming far less
important. San Cannon is Chief at the Economic Information Management at
the FRB; she presented "Snippets of Data at a Glance: Using RSS to
Deliver Statistics" at the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe's Dissemination and Communication Work Session in Geneva
(Switzerland) in May 2008. An early version was also presented at the
IASSIST conference in 2007. Instant access to information on a variety
of devices meant that few would wait until the FRB had information
posted on a website; the response, in collaboration with other central
banks, was to create RSS-CB, a specification for central bank data. This
was also a response to how FRB content was being "harvested" or
accessed by automated processes as well as some "screen scraping"
software that was used to pull the latest exchange rate or commercial
paper rate from an HTML table. Instead there was developed an
alternative format for human readers as well as for machines. The
article shows details in examples of coding of the RSS with content like
the exchange rate for the US dollar and the Mexican peso. Many
international institutions are now producing RSS-CB feeds, and many are
meeting in a Central Bank Online Communications group collaborating on a
version 1.2.

The last article in the IQ 31-2 is authored by Lynn Woolfrey at the
University of Cape Town. Her article outlines "The Establishment of the
African Association of Statistical Data Archivests (AASDA)". The
introduction explains: "AASDA represents practitioners in survey data
curation in Africa and was established to facilitate co-operation among
them with regard to the development and use of best practices in the
preservation and sharing of survey microdata in the region. This
Association was established with the assistance of international
organisations promoting optimal management of survey data. These
included the International Household Survey Network (IHSN) and the
International Association for Social Science Information Service and
Technology (IASSIST)." We are naturally happy that IASSIST was found of
help here and the article shows how IHSN was aware and could take action
to improve the survey data production and utilization in developing
countries. The focus on establishing a community of practice for sharing
African data found realization when the AASDA held the inaugural meeting
in April 2008.

Remember to take a look at the website <http://iassistdata.org> and the
IASSIST blog - the IASSIST Communiqué -- at <http://iassistblog.org>.

Articles for the IASSIST Quarterly are very welcome. Articles can be
papers from IASSIST conferences, from other conferences, from local
presentations, discussion input, etc. Contact the editor via e-mail: kbr
AT sam.sdu.dk.

Best regards, Karsten

Karsten Boye Rasmussen, editor of the IASSIST Quarterly, kbr AT
sam.sdu.dk Marketing & Management, SDU, University of Southern Denmark

 
