+++
nid = "648"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "new IQ"
tags = [ "IASSIST Conferences", "Data Access & Open Data", "Professional Development", "News and Announcements", "Other Topics", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/new-iq-0"
date = "2008-08-15 13:07:45 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-2.jpg"
+++
The IASSIST Quarterly (IQ Vol. 31 issue 1 - 2007) is now available on
the web:

<http://iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iqvol31.html>

Welcome to the first issue of the IASSIST Quarterly, vol. 31. We have
passed the 34th IASSIST conference, also known as the Stanford IASSIST
2008 conference - best ever. However, the IASSIST Quarterly vol. 31 is
known also as the 2007 volume. Yes, we are behind our schedule; but at
least we are consistently so. Our lack of currentness is not critical.
We do not expect to bring you the weather forecast. The spring issue
might be out when leaves are turning. And that would be ok. But staying
in tune with the seasons by lacking a year is somehow annoying. And with
production we are even missing that. One way of bringing us more in sync
with the reality of time is by IASSIST members not only going to the
conferences, and not only presenting at the conferences, but by changing
their presentation into an article for the wider public. By doing so you
get the extra bonus of having your writing reviewed and proofed and thus
ending up with a much better product.

At the IASSIST 2007 conference in Montreal in a session named "New
Discovery Tools: Thinking Outside the Catalogue" Taina J채채skel채inen and
Tuomas J. Alater채 from the Finnish Social Science Data Archive gave a
presentation on "Multilingual Web Services - Possibilities and
Pitfalls". In turning this presentation into an article they qualified
the first part into "Multilingual Web Services of Data Archives". In
their article, the first in this issue of the IQ, they share their
experience of setting up a website supporting the Finnish, English and
also Swedish languages. One serious problem of multilingual websites
happens when the user clicks from a page in his preferred language onto
what is for him an incomprehensible webpage in the dominant language of
the site. For data archives effective retrieval of datasets is a
necessity, and it is typically the documentation at the study level that
is being searched. Many archives have study descriptions in English for
exactly that purpose. If that is not available the authors recommend
detailed contact information in order to obtain more information about
the datasets.

The second article is from Eun-ha Hong at Wilfred Laurier University and
Linda Lowry at Brock University. They are both employed as "business
and economics librarians" at their respective universities and they
present "Business data: issues and challenges from the Canadian
perspective". The article was presented at the IASSIST 2007 conference
in the session on "Data Services mash-ups: Maps, Research and
Everything!". I find that the Hong and Lowry paper is mostly about
research. Their goal is to start a discussion about key challenges in
supporting the teaching and research use of business data. They refer to
observations about the growing importance of datasets, and continue with
the categorization and trends of business data. There is a trend showing
a growing demand in business data; unfortunately the business data often
is the product of business models. Or to put it bluntly - the data is
expensive. The authors show the uneven distribution of their selection
of four core numeric business databases among Ontario universities.
Within the business school area, there is the same discussion as
elsewhere concerning support for data users when most librarians are not
sufficiently educated in that type of data use. A "community of
practice" is proposed; IASSIST is seen as a natural home for this and
also as reaching a critical mass for convincing the commercial data
vendors. I hope the article will bring fruitful discussions at the
coming conference.

The last article in this issue is "A Survey Data Archive Network in
Africa - Possibilities and Practicalities" by Lynn Woolfrey from the
University of Cape Town. Woolfrey is the Data Manager at the DataFirst
Survey Data Archive at the university. The point of departure for the
article is that survey data archives have two central functions; they
both facilitate data sharing and assist in safeguarding the quality of
the data shared. Data archives share their data in networks on regional
and global scales. However, this type of network is lacking in Africa
and the article looks into the possibility of establishing such a
network there. Lynn Woolfrey argues for the importance of social survey
data in policy-making for social and economic development. The vital
role of quantitative data in the development of the African continent
was acknowledged in a UN draft charter. The support for statistical
agencies would be complemented by a network of survey data archives.
Some of the obstacles for this positive development are mentioned: lack
of data sharing culture, lack of resources including skilled staff,
technical and logistical issues, as well as language where research uses
several languages (though that is not as many as in Europe, I could
add). A first start in this direction resulted from the 2007 IASSIST
conference, with the establishment of an African mailing list with
representatives from South Africa, Cameroon, Ethiopia, the Gambia,
Ghana, Mozambique, Niger, and Uganda. With the need and the rationale
for the establishment of the network, and with the support from
participants in similar networks, the development of an African survey
data network will be interesting to follow.

Happy reading.

Articles for the IASSIST Quarterly are very welcome. Articles can be
papers from IASSIST conferences, from other conferences, from local
presentations, discussion input, etc. Contact the editor via e-mail:
kbr@sam.sdu.dk.

Best regards, Karsten

Karsten Boye Rasmussen, editor of the IASSIST Quarterly,
kbr@sam.sdu.dk, Marketing & Management, SDU, University of Southern
Denmark +45 6550 2115
