+++
nid = "3404"
uid = "19"
author = "StuartM"
title = "New IASSIST Quarterly now available!"
tags = [ "Asia/Pacific", "Canada", "Data Access & Open Data", "Data Archives and Service Providers", "Europe", "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/new-iassist-quarterly-now-available"
date = "2013-05-16 05:56:15 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
Editor notes: 

**Data bring maps, archive brings data, and accreditation brings research**

[This issue (volume 36-1, 2012)](/iq/issue/36/1) of the IASSIST
Quarterly (IQ) is the first of the 2012 issues. This editorial is
written in March 2013 when many IASSIST people have received acceptance
for their papers at the upcoming conference IASSIST 2013 in Cologne. I
am certain there will be many interesting presentations at the
conference. However, presenters can reach a greater audience by having
their paper published in forthcoming issues of the IQ.

The three papers in this issue bring reports on the presentation and
availability of data in a geographical portal for geospatial data, the
collection and dissemination of holdings in a data archive, and on
access to trans-national data and the accreditation involved.

The first paper is Scholars GeoPortal: A new platform for geospatial
data discovery, exploration and access in Ontario universities. The
authors are Elizabeth Hill and Leanne Trimble (formerly Hindmarch) of
University of Western Ontario and Scholars Portal, Toronto. The paper
was presented at the IASSIST 2011 conference Data Science Professionals:
A Global Community of Sharing at Simon Fraser University and the
University of British Columbia in Vancouver, in the session Power of
Partnerships in Data Creation and Sharing. Sharing was the theme for the
conference, the session, and certainly also the paper on the Scholars
GeoPortal. Data collections are no longer only numeric data collections.
This paper focuses on the use of geospatial data for learning, reporting
a project carried out for universities in the province of Ontario on the
initiative of the Ontario Council of University Libraries (OCUL). The
paper describes the background - the need and the vision - and the
components of the Geospatial Portal Project. The project needs to have
very good metadata handling in order to provide valid results and the
paper demonstrates how the GeoPortal presents the various different
types of data. The portal is also used for research and has further
involved policy makers and legal experts.

The second paper was presented at the IASSIST 2012 conference Data
Science for a Connected World: Unlocking and Harnessing the Power of
Information in Washington, DC hosted by NORC. In the session National
Data Landscapes: Policies, Strategies, and Contrasts, the paper
Strategies of Promoting the Use of Survey Research Data Archive was
presented by the Meng-Li Yang from the Center For Survey Research,
RCHSS, Academia Sinica, in Taiwan. The paper is a report from the
largest data archive in Asia: the Survey Research Data Archive, Taiwan,
whose collection includes government statistics raw data. The data
archive was established in 1994 and now has 1400 members who can draw on
the facilities of the archive including direct downloading of datasets.
In 2011 a survey showed that about 20% of a relevant group of
researchers were members of the data archive. This result and other
findings led to strategies on improving the search facility and active
promotion of the service. The paper goes into details on the tasks that
were necessary to improve the search facility. These details and other
observations and experiences are provided for others in the data archive
arena.

Paola Tubaro, University of Greenwich and CNRS has, with Marie Cros,
Université de Lille and Roxane Silberman, CNRS - Réseau Quetelet,
written the paper Access to official data and researcher accreditation
in Europe: existing barriers and a way forward. The authors perceive
that the barriers against trans-national access to data in Europe are
based upon accreditation and that there are major inconsistencies across
the countries. One obvious barrier is that some descriptions are
available only in the national language, other barriers are at the
policy-level and will require negotiation and coordination. The paper
presents the information collected on European accreditation procedures
based on the trio: eligibility, application, and service. Accreditation
is found to involve the criteria of eligibility (who is a researcher
etc.), the procedure of application (how to request access etc.), and
the level of service (who approves applications etc.). This work is part
of the Data without Boundaries project in the EC 7th Framework. The
positive conclusion is that almost all European countries provide
research access to micro-data, enabled by the Open Data movement and
other factors. But there still remain areas where improvement is needed
for better trans-national data access.

Articles for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome. They can be
papers from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and workshops, from
local presentations or papers especially written for the IQ. Authors are
permitted "deep links" where you link directly to your paper published
in the IQ. Chairing a conference session with the purpose of aggregating
and integrating papers for a special issue IQ is also much appreciated
as the information reaches many more people than the session
participants, and will be readily available on the IASSIST website at
<http://www.iassistdata.org>.

Authors are very welcome to take a look at the instructions and layout: 
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>.

Authors can also contact me via e-mail: <kbr@sam.sdu.dk>. Should you be
interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest editor(s) I
will also be delighted to hear from you.

Karsten Boye Rasmussen

March 2013

Editor
