+++
nid = "3444"
uid = "10"
author = "Chuck"
title = "OR2013:  Open Repositories Confront Research Data"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "Data Access & Open Data", "Digital Repositories", "Tools, Apps, Technology",]
oldpath = "/blog/or2013-open-repositories-confront-research-data"
date = "2013-07-19 14:38:23 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iassist5presidents-400x300.jpg"
+++

Open Repositories 2013 was hosted by the University of Prince Edward
Island from July 8-12. A strong research data stream ran throughout this
conference, which was attended by over 300 participants from around the
globe.  To my delight, many IASSISTers were in attendance, including the
current IASSIST President and four Past-Presidents!  Rarely do such
sightings happen outside an IASSIST conference.

{{< figure src="/img/blog/iassist5presidents.jpg" title="IASSIST Five Presidents by Limor Peer" >}}

This was my first Open Repositories conference and after the cool
reception that research data received at the SPARC IR meetings in
Baltimore a few years ago, I was unsure how data would be treated at
this conference.  I was pleasantly surprised by the enthusiastic
interest of this community toward research data.  It helped that there
were many IASSISTers present but the interest in research data was
beyond that of just our community.  This conference truly found an
appropriate intersection between the communities of social science data
and open repositories. 

Thanks go to Robin Rice (IASSIST), Angus Whyte (DCC), and Kathleen
Shearer (COAR) for organizing a workshop entitled, "Institutional
Repositories Dealing with Data: What a difference a 'D' makes!"  Michael
Witt, Courtney Matthews, and I joined these three organizers to address
a range of issues that research data pose for those operating
repositories.  The registration for this workshop was capped at 40
because of our desire to host six discussion tables of approximately
seven participants each.  The workshop was fully subscribed and Kathleen
counted over 50 participants prior to the coffee break.  The number
clearly expresses the wider interest in research data at OR2013.

{{< figure src="/img/blog/dealingwdata.jpg" title="Dealing with Data speakers by Robin Rice" >}}

Our workshop helped set the stage for other sessions during the week. 
For example, we talked about environmental drivers popularizing interest
in research data, including topics around academic integrity.  Regarding
this specific issue, we noted that the focus is typically directed
toward specific publication-related datasets and the access needed to
support the reproducibility of published research findings.  Both the
opening and closing plenary speakers addressed aspects of academic
integrity and the role of repositories in supporting the reproducibility
of research findings.  Victoria Stodden, the opening plenary speaker,
presented a compelling and articulate case for access to both the data
and computer code upon which published findings are based.  She calls
herself a computational scientist and defends the need to preserve
computer code as well as data to facilitate the reproducibility of
scientific findings.  Jean-Claude Guédon, the closing plenary speaker,
bracketed this discussion on academic integrity.  He spoke about
scholarly publishing and how the commercial drive toward indicators of
excellence has resulted in cheating.  He likened some academics to Lance
Armstrong, cheating to become number one.  He feels that quality rather
than excellence is a better indicator of scientific success.

Between these two stimulating plenary speakers, there was a number of
sessions during which research data were discussed.  I was particularly
interested in a panel of six entitled, "Research Data and Repositories,"
especially because the speakers were from the repository community
instead of the data community.  They each took turns responding to
questions about what their repositories do now regarding research data
and what they see happening in the future.  In a nutshell, their answers
tended to describe the desire to make better connections between the
publications in their repositories with the data underpinning the
findings in these articles.  They also spoke about the need to support
more stages of the research lifecycle, which often involves aspects of
the data lifecycle within research.  There were also statements that
reinforced the need for our (IASSIST's) continued interaction with the
repository community.  The use of readme files in the absence of
standards-based metadata and other practices, where our data community
has moved the best-practice yardstick well beyond, demonstrate the need
for our communities to continue in dialogue. 

Chuck Humphrey
