+++
nid = "3378"
uid = "11"
author = "San"
title = "In search of:  Best practice for code repositories?"
tags = [ "Analytical Methods and Software", "Digital Repositories", "Tools, Apps, Technology",]
oldpath = "/blog/search-best-practice-code-repositories"
date = "2013-03-05 12:45:39 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
I was asked by a colleague about organized efforts within the economics
community to develop or support repositories of code for research.  Her
experience was with the astrophysics world which apparently has several
and she was wondering what could be learned from another academic
community.  So I asked a non-random sample of technical economists with
whom I work, and then expanded the question to cover all of social
sciences and posed the question to the IASSIST community. 

In a nutshell, the answer seems to be "nope, nothing organized across
the profession" -- even with the profession very broadly defined.  The
general consensus for both the economics world and the more general
social science community was that there was some chaos mixed with a
little schizophrenia. I was told there are there are instances of such
repositories, but they were described to me as "isolated attempts" such
as this one by Volker Wieland:  <http://www.macromodelbase.com/>.  Some
folks mentioned repositories that were package or language based such as
R modules or SAS code from the SAS-L list or online at sascommunity.org.

Many people pointed out that there are more repositories being
associated with journals so that authors can (or are required to) submit
their data and code when submitting a paper for publication. Several
responses touched on this issue of replication, which is the impetus for
most journal requirements, including one that pointed out a "replication
archive" at Yale (<http://isps.yale.edu/research/data>).  I was also
pointed to an interested paper that questions whether such archives
promote replicable research
([http://www.pages.drexel.edu/~bdm25/cje.pdf](http://www.pages.drexel.edu/%7Ebdm25/cje.pdf))
but that's a discussion for another post.

By far, the most common reference I received was for the repositories
associated with RePEc (Research Papers in Economics) which offers a
broad range of services to the economic research community.  There
you'll find the IDEAS site (<http://ideas.repec.org/>) and the QM&RBC
site with code for Dynamic General Equilibrium models
[(http://dge.repec.org/](//dge.repec.org/)) both run by the St. Louis
Fed.

I also heard from support folks who had tried to build a code repository
for their departments and were disappointed by the lack of enthusiasm
for the project. The general consensus is that economists would love to
leverage other people's code but don't want to give away their
proprietary models.  They should know there is no such thing as a free
lunch! 

 I did hear that project specific repositories were found to be useful
but I think of those as collaboration tools rather than a dissemination
platform.  That said, one economist did end his email to me with the
following plea:  "lots of authors provide code on their websites, but
there is no authoritative host. Will you start one please?"

/san/
