+++
nid = "610"
uid = "11"
author = "San"
title = "Session A1:  views from the floor"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals",]
oldpath = "/blog/session-a1-views-floor"
date = "2007-05-16 22:39:43 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
An overriding theme of the A1 session, Self-Archiving or Self Storage,
was empowering data producers to participate in creating and providing
metadata for their materials. Another way to describe it: involving
researchers in these processes by meeting them where they're at with the
most flexible tools possible. I must also mention that this was an
extremely popular session, drawing a standing-room-only crowd. So this
roving blogger found a comfy seat in the back of the room on the floor,
next to the fake potted palm. Hence, she was unable to see any of the
visuals! So those of you fortunate to really see the complete
presentations must chime and tell me what I missed! Most if not all
presenters will be at Thursday's poster session.

Ken Miller and Graham Pryor discussed the background of StORe
(Source-to-Output Repositories), generally envisioned as a mechanism to
link literature to its underlying data. The most recent phase extended
the concept to non-social science disciplines and involved surveying the
practices of about 3,000 researchers. There is an overriding opinion
that although open access to data is great for consumers,, producers
still rely on well-established professional networking to learn about
and access specialized data. Based on the concept of institutional
repositories, a middleware gathers essential study-level metadata
elements from researchers (in a reasonably painless fashion!). Its goal
is to be simple; permit searching to replicate the browsing experience;
be reasonably "unbureaucractic;" permit data self management; and
provide researchers with latitude to determine such elements as which
items will be public, who has access to the data products, and how long
data would be embargoed. For further information, see the extensive
StORe wiki at <http://jiscstore.jot.com/WikiHome>

Marion Witenberg and Rutger Kramer of DANS presented on the EASY
initiative. Again, the focus is on providing a relatively painless
mechanism for researchers to deposit datasets themselves using a
flexible and customized tool. (And yours truly again missed out on the
cool visuals in the presentation!) As a unit, DANS is responsible for
storing and providing access to research data in the social sciences and
humanities. EASY was designed so that depositors supply core metadata
with a minimal intervention from a data archivist, if desired. The
product is intended to be flexible for them while aiding the data
workflow associated with metadata assignment, uploading, ingesting,
announcing, and delivery. Among the glitches encountered are that EASY
is intended to be English-language based, whereas much information
researchers provide is in Dutch. This will be further complicated as the
40 years of Steinmetz archive data to be incorporated are in English,
although DANS hopes to develop a bilingual search engine to address
this. Actually, this summary doesn't do justice to the paper, so check
out the EASY site at <http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/dms> and come to the
poster on Thursday.

Charlie Thomas represented UC Berkeley's SDA team. SDA 3.1 was released
a few weeks ago and includes an application for loading datasets. Said
application, an "archiver," employs a graphical web-based interface and
requires three files (ascii data, meatadata in DDL format, and a grouped
variable list). The archiver is highly customizable and serves a dual
function: an internal management tool and a way to make SDA support more
available to external users. Charlie mentioned specifically classroom
applications, such as professor making a survey available so students
gain experience with SDA for analysis. The presentation handout can be
viewed here: http://sda.berkeley.edu/present/iassist07/

Regarding the presentation by Kristin Partlo and Rachael Barlow on
social bookmarking tools, dear readers, your blogger must confess: She
was almost entirely ignorant of the potential of such social bookmarking
tools as <http://del.icio.us/> and http://www.furl.net/, let alone how
effectively they could be applied as instructional, collaborative, and
professional tools. And judging from the number of people in the room
who had much experience with these things, she wasn't alone! Bookmarking
tools can create a very dynamic resource environment to be shared and
that is enhanced by such sharing. Key features of FURL and del.icio.us
include creating bookmark lists accessible from anywhere, using tag
"clouds" or groups of like sites, identifying other users who have
tagged the same items and access to their lists. (Major presenter tip
here: Think about all those neat links sent to you by colleagues that
are just languishing in your mail inboxes when you could be really
*using* them. Now why didn't *I* think of that?) The presenters
emphasized the value of these resources for collaborative work among
students. Trinity College [www.trincoll.edu](http://www.trincoll.edu/)
has incorporated the ability to post items to a user's del.icio.us
account and this will be one of the topics incorporated as part of the
poster session, IASSIST 2.0

Submitted by Pam Baxter
