+++
nid = "613"
uid = "11"
author = "San"
title = "Session D3:  views from near a plug...."
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "IASSIST Conferences",]
oldpath = "/blog/session-d3-views-near-plug"
date = "2007-05-18 01:54:41 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
Your trusty blogger attended Data Access Questions:  Open and Shut
(session D3).   She assumed that, as an august member of the blogging
press, she would be afforded a primo seat.  But no, she again found
herself sitting on the floor in the corner, next to another fake potted
palm!  Thank heavens the session was moved to a neighboring
room---larger and with a microphone. Obviously, a popular session on the
challenges of working with data agreements from the perspectives of
acquisition and user support.

Susan Cadogan, member of the acquisitions team at the UK data archive,
opened with a review of the archive from 1967 to date, its expansion and
a review of the legal framework for data deposit, maintenance, and
dissemination.  Access to deposits is governed by one of three access
conditions:  completely open access for researchers, access with the
archive acting on behalf of the depositor, and use dependent on
permission of the depositor (the last only on request).    The remainder
was a discussion of relations with depositors in general and development
of the requisite agreements governing access and use as they've changed
over time.  Although the goal is to make data available as widely as
possible, it's also governed by requirements of the end-user license. 
Over time, the collection has expanded in scope to include datasets with
a greater degree of detail and wider geographic coverage, both of which
can correlate with increased disclosure risks.  Prime examples are labor
force and demographic datasets, which can entail special-use licenses
for users.

Looking ahead, the archive plans to acquire commercial data, especially
of the financial and marketing variety, being both rich in information
and expensive in €   £   $.   (In the case of Datastream, content is
limited to historical data due to the cost.) These have represented new
challenges in the form of negotiating rather tight and specific access
contracts. Future sustainability remains a question.  (Read:  How
affordable is this stuff in the long term? )

In response to several questions, she elaborated on the need to acquire
data more broadly (looking beyond the needs of individual research
teams); the priority of getting data deposited by researchers, cleaned
by archive staff, then dealing with a specified embargo period as the
"price" of getting data as close in time to its production as possible
(lest it disappear); how to enforce data restrictions imposed on users
of more restrictive studies (site visits will be undertaken at the
termination of approved projects).

Keit Bang was lead presenter of When Data Aren't Open (with  Jennifer
Darrough, formerly at the Penn State Population Research Institute).  He
reviewed the history, mission, and organization of PRI, and specifically
the role of the data archive that supports its researchers.  In
particular, services associated with restricted-used datasets have
expanded over the past several years to include 10 unique datasets, 20
restricted data contracts, support for the 105 researchers who are party
to these contracts.  Challenges unique to these services include
potentially protracted discussions regarding security plans; education
of users regarding their obligations to meet licensing commitments
(accomplished via various workshops, seminars, and general scolding when
required); controlling physical access by developing security protocols
with computing staff; and negotiating paperwork. Value to the mission of
PRI can be demonstrated by the increasing demand for such services and
publishing output (150+ articles published between 2004-2007) by
researchers using restricted data services.

Robert Downs, senior digital archivist, represented CIESIN presenters on
the topic of the Creative Commons licensing movement and the combined
goals of  allowing people to  use and redistribute their data, document
use, provide appropriate attribution, and track provenance.  Traditional
data licensing is, of course, challenging, fraught with time-consuming
paperwork, records maintenance hassles, and others too numerous to
detail here.  (Thank heavens for university counsel!) There are two
parts to permissions issues for CIESIN:  getting permissions from data
providers (including identifying ownership, not easy in the case of
researcher collaborations), requesting non-exclusive rights for CIESIN,
avoiding use restrictions whenever possible, requesting permission to
permit 3rd party redistribution.  The second component concerns what can
be called the user or distribution end:  establishing use and
re-distribution, determining what parts may be copyrighted versus freely
distributable (example:  Natural Disaster Hotspots Datasets might be
copyrightable but underlying hazard and vulnerability data may not be). 
How to handle such murky issues muddies application of the Creative
Commons concept.

Efforts so far have included a CC license to maps CIESIN creates and
disseminates which such information embedded in the graphic and included
in related metadata.  (For information on CC: 
<http://creativecommons.org/>  )

Tanvi Desai, database manager at LSE Research Laboratory, supports about
200 academic researchers.  She shared her experiences regarding
procedures to gain access to Eurostat products, a daunting task for many
and especially for those not affiliated with an EU academic or research
institution.  The latter group must apply for admissibility, a process
that takes -- well, let's just say it takes a really, really long time,
a lot longer than the boilerplate 10 weeks.  She described the
differences between institutional contracts and individual contracts for
data use, sharing of output with Eurostat, and a host of related
procedures regarding user status at their institutions, inconsistent
coverage of variables/countries across datasets, difficulties associated
with collaborators at more than one institution, the benefits and
challenges associated with various Eurostat data access methods (CD-ROM
distribution, via secure data lab in Luxembourg, remote system), and
difficulties regarding getting data cleared for release by Eurostat
statisticians.  (Nope, not going near that last one in print.)

Submitted by Pam  Baxter (the one behind the plant....)
