+++
nid = "660"
uid = "5"
author = "robin"
title = "Special IQ: Moving Research Data Into and Out of Institutional Repositories"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "IASSIST 2008", "IASSIST Conferences", "Reports & Studies", "Archiving, Preservation, Curation", "Data Access & Open Data", "Professional Development", "Digital Repositories", "News and Announcements", "Other Topics", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/special-iq-moving-research-data-and-out-institutional-repositories"
date = "2009-05-12 14:42:09 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-2.jpg"
+++
**The IASSIST Quarterly IQ Vol. 31 issue 3&4 is now available on the web:**

<http://iassistdata.org/publications/iq/iqvol31.html>

This issue will only be available on the web. There will be no printed
version mailed out to the membership.

This double issue is the work of the authors and their articles are
introduced below. We are presenting an integrated double issue of high
quality. We should also give a special thanks to the editors of the
issue. Gretchen Gano is the writing guest editor of this IQ as you can
see below. Gretchen Gano is the Assistant Curator Librarian for Public
Administration & Government Information and Coordinator, Data Service
Studio at New York University Libraries. Gretchen Gano collaborated on
this issue from the start with former IASSIST president Ann Green.
Together with the authors a great issue has been made.

Enjoy

Karsten Boye Rasmussen, IQ editor, associate professor, kbr@sam.sdu.dk,
Marketing & Management, SDU, University of Southern Denmark +45 6550
2115

**Guest Editor's Notes:**

The 2008 IASSIST Conference, "Technology of Data: Collection,
Communication, Access and Preservation" included a session entitled
"Moving Research Data Into and Out of Institutional Repositories" from
which several papers emerged. In "Interoperability Between Institutional
and Data Repositories: a Pilot Project at MIT", Katherine McNeill
describes a pilot project to enhance study discovery between two
repository systems housed in the same institution, DSpace and the
Institute for Quantitative Social Science Dataverse Network, by enabling
the harvesting and replication of metadata and content across the two
systems. In a related project across the pond, Libby Bishop scales this
discussion in her description of crossinstitutional collection sharing
between the University of Leeds and the UK Data Archive in the
Timescapes project. Bishop asserts that coordination among multiple
agents is likely to be challenging under any circumstances. Challenges
magnify when the trajectories of different life cycles, for research
projects and for data sharing, are considered. Robin Rice echoes these
sentiments in her article on the DISC-UK DataShare Project, a
collaboration between the Universities of Edinburgh, Oxford and
Southampton and the London School of Economics. Rice provides visual
evidence in a compelling diagram of the data sharing continuum based on
storage, discovery, and preservation conditions of the digital research
materials at each level along the scale -- from the lowly thumb drive
to the officious national archive. We see plainly that as one moves up
the continuum, more and more human effort and intervention is required
to craft the discovery, access, analytic and preservation environment.
In other words, data curators matter.

Two other papers tackle these challenges by emphasizing the needs of
data producers. Luis Martinez-Uribe introduces the University of
Oxford's Scoping Digital Repository Services for Research Data
Management project and the findings of a requirement gathering exercise.
While the study results reveal researchers' needs and workflows.
Martinez-Uribe asserts that the study process itself made an impact on
the participants. Study participants reflected on and, as a result,
fine-tuned how they work with data, why they create these materials in
the first place and were able to articulate reasons for managing these
resources the way they do. Similarly, Research Data & Environmental
Sciences Librarian, Gail Steinhart, writes about the development of
DataStaR, a Data Staging Repository hosted by Cornell University's
Albert R. Mann Library. The project developed as a "managed workspace"
where researchers contribute datasets they are still actively using in
direct response to questions that have to do with sharing in the active
research environment, rather than an archival one.

While the authors in this issue describe projects going on in many
different places and settings, taken together, these articles address
common themes. All address the challenge of scaling data exchange
between systems and then between institutions. This raises the perennial
question of standards: by what mechanisms will we set them, and how well
will we be able to follow them and still accommodate local needs? The
importance of aligning repository services with researcher needs is
another common thread. Data managers must ask, "how will the active
researcher benefit from curation efforts"? The answer may be that
benefit is more than finding or accessing a particular resource (yep, I
have downloaded the whole thing and all the bits are there), but instead
being able to examine this resource in many ways (okay, lets run
frequencies, now I want to see it on a map, and let's include some other
variables). This is a rich reuse experience, creating a real digital
"laboratory."

Finally, each contributor notes the expanding role of data manager. In
its own way, each project described here moves data managers upstream,
pre-publication, into the place where research is actively happening.
Though all of the articles focus on technological choices and
architectures to support research data curation, it is striking to
realize that each of these choices emerge from old-fashioned personal,
social, and organizational relationships. What we can strive for as data
and information managers is to work together as fellow researchers and
to be ever curious about how these partnerships and the sharing of
information back and forth can be enhanced by thoughtful information and
technology design. Some call this the digital plumbing, but I like to
think of it as e-gilding.

Gretchen Gano, New York University Libraries
