+++
nid = "611"
uid = "11"
author = "San"
title = "Technology befuddles session C3"
tags = [ "Community of Data Professionals", "IASSIST Conferences",]
oldpath = "/blog/technology-befuddles-session-c3"
date = "2007-05-16 23:07:44 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
So now that I remember my blog password, I have **lots** to say. I want
to extend my congratulations and kudos to my fellow session participants
in C3 (New Discovery Tools: Thinking Outside the Catalogue) where we
managed to kill **3** laptops and still do **4** outstanding
presentations. The room was too hot and too crowded but the attendees
were patient, enthusiastic and even provided some tech support!!

Paul Bern was the lucky presenter - the laptop didn't reallly crash
until he was done explaining how to make Google work better for us and
help us to help other folks find data. I propose that IASSISTers who do
create CSEs for data exploration link their CSEs together to really
harness the power of our community. Good job Paul!

The meltdown began with the next presenter....ME! Apparently it is true
that "everything is San's fault" because the chaos begin in the
middle of my presentation and plagued us the rest of the session! I
killed the first laptop and didn't even get to show off the cool RSS
stuff we've been working on. Therefore, I will totally abuse my postion
as blog editor and give the links for interested folks to check out for
themselves. Unless you really like looking at XML, I recommend using
IE7, Firefox 2.0 or an RSS reader to check these out but here they are:

[Fed funds rate](http://www.newyorkfed.org/rss/feeds/fedfunds.xml) from
the New York Fed

[Foreign exchange rates](http://www.bnm.gov.my/rss/fxrates.php) from the
Bank of Malaysia

[Commercial paper
rates](http://www.t.federalreserve.gov/feeds/CPratefeed.xml) from the
Federal Reserve Board (currently on a test server and liable to
disappear very soon!)

Details on the collaboration effort that brought these about can be
found on our [wiki](http://www.cbwiki.net/wiki/index.php/RSS-CBMain).
Please stop by and take a look - let me know what you think about this
crazy idea of publishing data one number at a time!

So after I killed the first laptop, a second laptop arrived but not
before our brave colleagues, Taina J채채skel채inen and Tuomas J. Alater채
from the Finnish Social Science Data Archive, had to start their talk
without their powerpoint. The discussion went on, however, and Taina
explained very nicely the difficult job they face having to maintain
webpages in **three** languages. As I wear a web hat as part of my job,
I really appreciated the part of the discussion where she pointed out
that multilingual websites need to actually be separate websites
developed in separate languages rather than multiple translations of a
single language site. This was also the first IASSIST presentation that
I can recall that emphasized usability in a website - which made my
colleague, Meredith the Usability Guru, very happy. We were also
reminded that users are IMPATIENT and that we can't give them what they
want fast enough no matter the delivery speed. The powerpoint eventually
guided us to the end of the talk - good tech support Tuomas!!

Although it looked at first like we might make it through a second
presentation without mishap, the helpful local arrangements folks
decided to abandon the equipment we were using and Anastassia gave up
her personal laptop to ensure that the fourth presentation went off
without a hitch. I have to say, I have never seen so many icons on a
desktop in my life! But eventually we made it to the presentation by
Tatyana Yudina and Anna Bogomolova of Moscow State University who showed
us how to build and use search tools that not only operate in two
languages but actually use two alphabets! (I confess that I think any
interface that looks as cool with Cyrillic letters as it does with our
boring English alphabet gets gold stars from me every time!) They
described the service they provide to add value to a host of research
information in multiple languages (and letters!) including adding links
to case law citations in court documents from the European Court of
Human Rights! Another excellent example of IASSISTers going all out to
do some assisting!

So a major round of applause for all of us who made through the 3 laptop
circus that was session C3. A standing ovation to our session chair Anna
Bombak who kept her cool, kept us on track and made the best use of our
technology downtime to handle questions and comments. I'm learning
**lots** of things to pay attention to as program chair for next year!

Submitted by San Cannon
