+++
nid = "3388"
uid = "312"
author = "e.stephenson"
title = "Update from COSSA: Changes to the Common Rule: The Implications for the Social and Behavioral Sciences"
tags = [ "Data-related Advocacy", "Data Access & Open Data", "United States", "Research Data Management", "Social Science Datasets", "News and Announcements",]
oldpath = "/blog/update-cossa-changes-common-rule-implications-social-and-behavioral-sciences"
date = "2013-03-25 14:34:57 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
This is from the **COSSA** Newsletter ([*Consortium of Social Science
Associations).*]{.st} March 25, 2013 Volume 32, Issue 6 Regarding a
workshop on proposed changes to the Common Rule.  Readers of these blog
entries will recall that these proposed changes would require that data
identitified in social science research would be required to meet HIPPA
standards; potentially rendering many public datasets unuseful for
research purposes.

A link to the webcast is here:
<http://sites.nationalacademies.org/DBASSE/BBCSS/CurrentProjects/DBASSE_080452#Workshop> 
George Alter spoke on the panel on Data Security and Sharing.

**Here is a summary of the COSSA report:**

On March 21 and 22, the National Academies' Board on Behavioral,
Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences (BBCSS) held a workshop on the
"Proposed Revisions to the Common Rule in Relation to the Behavioral
and Social Sciences." In 2011, the Department of Health and Human
Services proposed changes to the Common Rule, the regulations governing
the protection of human subjects in research, in an Advanced Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM). (For more information, see [Update, January
28,
2013](http://r20.rs6.net/tn.jsp?e=001pjpj4X4L3L1PpjRpA2kwuKEKASC5XO23CRVZ6s1lUCg6TxiKvJzYw75jJ5CMF_kn3Lay1eRSQETj11CmhmbHSRreZE4vt3hzZZqlCJ5N8SjIlRNttKc8o8sosgX7EfR1FXVIsI-7xZT2Y8shlVpp5nYQXylHwIHkjSZ83WMC22WRCg0pz5vGaQpLoqw4ZJIMDPmYnfYRjmxp2uN7X4gIIHIjAy6tNHvn)
and click
[here](http://r20.rs6.net/tn.jsp?e=001pjpj4X4L3L1iUMc67cvrCRQvaTd0cxvHq8Zr3xz1t_bnjKN4zkEo-2DbbtJ0FQjNJoaN5PReAIa4XdyDE28ig53QLpXk1zIEAIAMQCStELJ-xmJ91OkafnHdtJq-EEKAvZX2zMkJUde6Bpa0bEeYDeSHW3MJu44iIpdkfjjYpzMmPa-Yy9E0LA==)
for a response to the ANPRM from the social and behavioral science
community.) Several COSSA member organizations helped sponsor the
workshop. More information about the workshop, including presenters'
slides and an archived webcast, is available
[here](http://r20.rs6.net/tn.jsp?e=001pjpj4X4L3L3LRK3KDrtz0hPwfYj9iql0axHAJwf5Dc4CNwvikh2SyYexJuiGXJ17rr4P1gGoFahUOwZeRVqzdA7G0rUUZpl67j60k287lHtazGwAG07VuwjMRdtZAih_iNDbO38Xh1ymz2wisa5i7Opu0sqZ6PvDl7OMfw2wr2mYI4nvUjd8YfZY3l-pILRxLD5AQuic-cc=).
BBCSS will publish a summary report of the workshop. According to Robert
Hauser, Executive Director of the Division of Behavioral and Social
Sciences and Education (DBASSE), the Academies expect to convene a panel
a panel that will produce a consensus report with conclusions and
recommendations.

 

The workshop's opening session reviewed existing knowledge and evidence
about the functioning of the Common Rule and Institutional Review Boards
(IRBs). Connie Citro, Director of the Committee on National Statistics
at the National Academies, gave an overview of the many National
Academies' reports on human subjects protection published since 1979
and summarized the lessons learned. She pointed to four major takeaways
from the existing literature. First, one-size-fits-all approaches often
have unanticipated negative consequences. Second, there is no need to
reinvent the wheel regarding human subjects' protection. Third, a
balance needs to be struck between leaving subjects vulnerable and
handicapping researchers. Finally, the social and behavioral sciences
(SBS) are often not given the same consideration as the biomedical
sciences in writing regulations and thus need to be constantly vigilant
to make sure that new rules are appropriate for a SBS context.

 

Noting that there is a relatively small evidence base on the efficacy of
the Common Rule and IRBs, Jeffrey Rodamar, Department of Education,
reviewed some of the existing data. He found that despite popular
perception, IRBs function pretty well. They are generally no more of an
administrative burden than other grant-related activities; on average,
review takes less than three percent of a study's time; a majority of
studies are approved; expedited review takes less than a month on
average and full review takes less than two months; and extreme delays
are statistically uncommon. Rodamar described data showing that both SBS
and biomedical researchers generally approve of the IRB system. He
conceded that there are some problems with the Common Rule regulations
and IRBs, but, paraphrasing Winston Churchill, suggested that perhaps
"IRBs are worst form of governing research except for all those other
forms that have been tried from time to time."

 

**The "Minimal Risk" Standard**

 

The second session, moderated by Celia Fischer, Fordham University,
focused on the types of "risks and harms" encountered in SBS research.
Richard T. Campbell delved into the concept of "minimal risk," an
important area for researchers dealing with human subjects. The
determination of whether participation in a study represents a "minimal
risk" dictates the level of IRB review that takes place. Under the
Common Rule, a study represents minimal risk if "the probability and
magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not
greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily
life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological
examinations or tests." Noting that it is a "cognitively complex"
concept, Campbell suggested that risk can be thought of as the
relationship between the probability of harm occurring and the severity
of potential harm. Thus, the Common Rule provides some flexibility in
that it does not dictate that both probability severity must be
"minimal," just that, as probability increases, the severity of
possible harm must decrease (and vice versa). Given that other parts of
the definition are also thorny (such as what is meant by "daily
life"), Campbell suggested that the Office of Human Research Protection
(OHRP) could provide guidance to facilitate more consistent application
of the minimal risk benchmark.

 

Brian Mustanski, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
spoke about his research on risky and sensitive behavior (such as drug
use, sexual behavior, and HIV) in youth, which are topics that often
make IRBs skittish. He conducted a study that was reviewed by two IRBs.
One board approved it immediately, while the other delayed the study for
six months because it was felt to be a "slight increase" over minimal
risk. However, when Mustanski surveyed his subjects, a large majority
felt that their participation was less uncomfortable than a routine
medical exam (the minimal risk standard). Mustanski argued that such
institutional reluctance to approve research into controversial or
sensitive subjects as minimal risk can have a chilling effect, leading
to a poor evidence base for interventions with already underserved
populations, which is indeed the case regarding HIV prevention in LGBT
youth.

 

Steve Breckler, American Psychological Association and COSSA Board
Member, discussed the concept of risk in the SBS context. He reminded
the audience that the broad goal of assessing risk is to calibrate the
level of review to the level of risk a study poses to participants, in
other words, to protect subjects and reduce unnecessary regulatory
burden. He argued that the social science community should put greater
focus on producing evidence to determine how well regulations are
working and that having better guidance and tools for assessing risk
would facilitate the work of IRBs.

 

Charles Plott, California Institute of Technology and a former COSSA
Board member, posed the question of whether the entirety of the research
endeavors for some fields, like economics, political science, game
theory and decision science, could be said to be wholly without risk. In
a survey of economics, political science, and judgment and decision
making associations, Plott found very low numbers of adverse incidents
and reports of harm, all of which were low-magnitude events (such as
feelings of stress or frustration). He argued that some research
topics-- markets, committees and voting, games, processes, and
decisions-- and some research methods-- questionnaires, computer
games, etc.-- can be said to pose no potential harm to subjects and
should thus be exempted from consideration under the Common Rule.

 

**Informed Consent and Special Populations**

 

A session on the consent process and special populations was moderated
by Margaret Foster Riley, University of Virginia. Sally Powers,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, discussed how consent operates in
her research on depression, which collects "rich" behavioral and
biospecimen data (which can be recoded and analyzed as part of future
analysis). The proposed changes to the Common Rule would require that
prior consent is obtained for re-analysis of biospecimens, but that
consent should be given for open-ended use of specimens. However, the
changes do not address rich behavioral data; Powers argued that the same
standards should be applied.

 

Roxane Cohen Silver explained how she conducts research on victims of
disasters and traumatic experiences (like natural disasters, infant
death, and mass shootings) shortly after such events occur. Silver
argued that such research can be conducted ethically and sensitively, if
participants are given multiple opportunities to opt out, are allowed to
refuse to answer questions and researchers and staff are well-trained.
Noting that this type of research is most valuable if it is commenced
immediately after a traumatic event, Silver described her arrangement
with her IRB, which pre-approved a generic post-disaster proposal. In
the aftermath of a traumatic event, Silver provides the IRB with
specific information and can get full approval within 48 hours.

 

Celia Fischer, Fordham University, spoke about some of the issues
involving obtaining informed consent from children. She argued that
simplifying consent forms, as proposed by the ANPRM, would be useful.
However, relying on standardized forms can be problematic for certain
types of research and subjects of different ages, language skills, and
educational backgrounds. Fischer observed that verbal consent can be a
better form in certain contexts. She also noted that emancipated minors
are often not treated as full adults by IRBs, despite being adults under
the law. Fischer pointed out the issue of re-obtaining consent from
adults, for whom parental consent had been granted when they were
minors.

 

**Data Security and Sharing**

 

David Weir, University of Michigan Survey Research Center, moderated a
panel on "Data Use and Sharing and Technological Advancement." The
proposals in the ANPRM would mandate that all studies that collect
identifiable or potentially identifiable data to have data security
plans. George Alter, University of Michigan Interuniversity Consortium
for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), which archives and protects
social science data, spoke about some of the ways data can be kept
secure. Informational risk can be reduced by improving study design
(implementing certain sampling procedures, using multiple sites), having
protection plans in place, using data repositories and archives, and
training. ICPSR restricts data based on the degree of risk of disclosure
and severity of harm from that disclosure, from publically releasing
data online to requiring researchers work with data in physical data
enclaves.

 

Taylor Martin, University of Utah, spoke about the data security
implications of her research into math learning, which collects rich
data from children playing online educational games. This type of
research shows promise in terms of providing new information about how
different kinds of children learn and how we can teach them better.
However, concerns about data security can have a chilling effect on data
sharing and reuse among researchers. Martin observed that for-profit
companies are collecting data and doing the same kind of research
without having to go through the same hurdles as researchers.

 

Susan Bouregy, Yale University Human Research Protection Program, raised
concerns about the ANPRM's proposal to apply HIPAA standards for
deidentification of data (requiring removal of 18 specific identifiers).
Bouregy noted such standards may make some data sets unusable while
ignoring other ways individuals could be identified. She also argued
that some of the mandated HIPAA security elements are not appropriate
for certain types of social science research. Furthermore, it ignored
that not all identified data is risky. Finally, Boregy suggested that
the ANPRM's requirement that all suspected data breaches be reported
should be made more flexible and allow IRBs to tailor reporting to the
context of each situation.

 

**Multi-Disciplinary and Multi-Site Studies**

 

Robert Levine, Yale, University, moderated a session focused on
multi-disciplinary and multi-site studies. Pearl O'Rourke, Partners
Health Care System, discussed the requirement that multi-site studies
use a single IRB of record. She noted that having a central IRB does not
absolve the individual institutions of fulfilling a number of
responsibilities in overseeing and approving research. O'Rourke was
concerned that mandating a central IRB would not address the complexity
of each situation. Furthermore, the requirement underestimates the costs
and time involved in running a central IRB.

 

Laura Stark, Vanderbilt University Center for Medicine Health and
Society, gave an ethnographic perspective on IRB decision-making. As an
explanation for why IRBs reach different conclusions regarding the risk
level of similar research, Stark suggested the concept of "local
precedents," or allowing past decisions to govern the evaluation of
subsequent research. Such precedents may lead to faster decisions and
internal consistency, but they can be problematic for researchers
working with multiple IRBs. Stark offered three strategies to work
around local precedents: 1) study networks (having a central IRB for
multiple sites), 2) collegial review (allowing departmental experts to
review research), and 3) decision repositories (online archives of
approved protocols from many IRBs).

 

Thomas Coates, University of California, Los Angeles Program in Global
Health, shared his experience with multinational studies (which are not
addressed by the ANPRM). Some concerns he encountered included whether
requiring other countries to adhere to U.S. requirements could be
considered paternalistic, how to evaluate minimum risk in different
cultural and economic contexts, and how to harmonize U.S.,
international, and local regulations. Coates also stressed the
importance of receiving approval from local bodies in addition to
U.S.-based IRBs.

 

**The Scope of Institutional Review Boards**

 

A final session, moderated by Yonette Thomas, Howard University and a
COSSA board member, focused on the "Purview and Roles of IRBs." Lois
Brako, University of Michigan, discussed the ANPRM's proposed changes
from the perspective of an IRB that has made strides to become more
innovative and flexible. Brako praised the ANPRM's proposals to reduce
the oversight burden for minimal risk studies, eliminate annual review,
and harmonize federal regulations (so long as the harmonization does not
take the form of a unilateral one-size-fits-all approach). However, she
argued that some of the proposals are unnecessarily burdensome,
including requiring all institutions that receive Common Rule funding to
be subject to federal oversight, some of the information security
provisions, requiring reports of all adverse events to be submitted and
stored in a central database, and expanding "human subjects" to
include deidentified biospeicimens. Brako also suggested that in some
cases, clearer guidance from OHRP would be more helpful than changed
regulations.

 

Rena Lederman, Princeton University, observed that the Common Rule
regulations were written from a biomedical perspective and are
particularly unsuited for certain types of SBS research, such as
anthropological fieldwork. Anthropologists establish thick relationships
with their subjects, immerse themselves in other cultures, and do not
test hypotheses or run controlled experiments. The ANPRM's requirements
for informational security could cripple anthropological research
(anthropologists' detailed fields notes would treated as data with
informational risks under the new rules, raising the question of how
such notes could be deidentified). Rather than trying to adapt the
Common Rule to fit SBS research, Lederman proposed that it be only
applied to biomedical research. She proposed the creation of a National
Commission to develop an alternative guidance and framework to address
SBS research risks.

 

Cheryl Crawford Watson, National Institute of Justice (NIJ), discussed
the Department of Justice's (DOJ) approach to confidentiality and how
it differs from other regulations regarding human subjects protection.
Researchers funded by DOJ must submit a Privacy Certificate, which
protects researchers and data from subpoena. It also prevents the
researcher from violating subjects' privacy for any reason other than
future criminal conduct. The DOJ privacy certificate differs from the
certificate of confidentiality mandated by other agencies (like Health
and Human Services) in that it prohibits researchers from reporting
child abuse, reportable communicable diseases, and threatened harm to
self or others. In order to be allowed to report such abuse, researchers
must get the subjects to sign a separate consent-to-report form. The
certificate is so strict due to concerns that few of the subjects under
DOJ's purview would consent to participate in research otherwise.



