+++
nid = "7591"
uid = "157"
author = "mhayslett"
title = "Winter 2016 IASSIST Quarterly Posted"
tags = [ "News and Announcements", "IQ",]
oldpath = "/blog/winter-2016-iassist-quarterly-posted"
date = "2017-10-04 09:12:09 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/iq-3.png"
+++
**Editor's Notes**
**When things get digital and huge. Doing the things right and doing the
right things.**


Welcome to the fourth issue of Volume 40 of the IASSIST Quarterly (IQ
40:4, 2016).


There is a lot of management involved in the data management carried out
at data archives and with data collections. The phrase 'Doing the
things right and doing the right things' belongs to fathers of modern
management and is used to distinguish management vs. leadership,
efficiency vs. effectiveness, and tactics vs. strategy. The winning
authors of the 2016 lASSIST paper competition used the article 'More
Product, Less Process: Revamping Traditional Archival Processing' (Mark
A. Greene and Dennis Meissner, 2005) as their starting point for
investigating the 'More Product, Less Process' (MPLP) approach for
digital data. The winning paper 'More Data, Less Process? The
Applicability of MPLP to Research Data' is written by Sophia
Lafferty-Hess and Thu-Mai Christian. The authors work at the Odum
Institute for Research in Social Science, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill as Research Data Manager and Assistant Director of
Archives. The paper was presented in the session 'Data Management
Archiving/Curation Platforms' at the IASSIST 2016 conference in Bergen.


In their paper Lafferty-Hess and Christian set out to apply the
principles and concepts formulated in MPLP to the archiving of digital
research data. They discuss data quality, usability, preservation and
access, leading to the question: What is the 'golden minimum' for
archiving digital data? In terms of data archiving, spending too much
effort on doing the things right may bring the trade-off problem that
the resources are not sufficient to do all the things. Users in the
digital world retrieve and consume lots of information by themselves,
but digital data comes in forms that are seldom directly consumable
without additional processing. When the authors also relate the phrase
'golden minimum' to the phrase 'good enough', management is again
brought into the discussion. In my view, the short formulation of
Herbert Simon's 'satisficing' concept in his theory of bounded
rationality is 'good enough is best'. Lafferty-Hess and Christian are
aware that shifting responsibility for certain data curation tasks from
the data archive to the data producer and to the data user can present
problems. Their best advice and hope for the future is that additional
'future research will help us build better understanding of the
connection between user needs and data curation processes'.


The following paper 'MMRepo - Storing qualitative and quantitative data
into one big data repository' is authored by Ingo Barkow, Catharina
Wasner and Fabian Odoni, working at University of Applied Sciences
Eastern Switzerland HTW Chur where Barkow is Associate Professor and
Wasner and Odoni are research associates. They describe a prototype of
their MMRepo project that addresses the problem of storing qualitative
large binary objects with regular quantitative data in order to achieve
the advantage of storing mixed mode data in the same infrastructure,
whereby only one system needs to be provided and maintained. Linking to
the first paper they are looking into the efficiency problem of doing
the things right. When you are efficient you can do more things right.
The project is trying to achieve this by combining CERN's Invenio portal
with a Hadoop 2.0 cluster and DDI 3.3. The prototype was successful and
the project continues. The paper was presented at the IASSIST 2016
conference in the session 'Technical Data Infrastructure Frameworks'.


Aidan Condron works with the Big Data Network Support team at the UK
Data Service. At the IASSIST 2016 conference he presented 'Data Science:
The Future of Social Science?' at the session 'Big Data, Big Science',
and has submitted this presentation as the paper 'Servicing New and
Novel Forms of Data: Opportunities for Social Science'. These 'new and
novel' forms are, for example, social media data that present potential
resources for researchers but also pose challenges for access provision
and analysis. The paper introduces Data Service as a Platform (DSaaP),
which is a project to establish technological infrastructure support. As
with the MMRepo project, the DSaaP project will include both familiar
and new and novel forms of data. The novel forms of data are often huge,
and 'Hadoop' solutions are also at play here using a data lake built
through use of open source software. The article also gives several
demonstrations through graphs of energy consumption based on 3.7 billion
datapoints. After the presentation and the paper, the Big Data Network
Support team will standardise and generalise the procedures developed
from their DSaaP project.


Submissions of papers for the IASSIST Quarterly are always very welcome.
We welcome input from IASSIST conferences or other conferences and
workshops, from local presentations or papers especially written for the
IQ. When you are preparing a presentation, give a thought to turning
your one-time presentation into a lasting contribution. We permit
authors 'deep links' into the IQ as well as deposition of the paper in
your local repository. Chairing a conference session with the purpose of
aggregating and integrating papers for a special issue IQ is also much
appreciated as the information reaches many more people than the session
participants, and will be readily available on the IASSIST website at
http://www.iassistdata.org.


Authors are very welcome to take a look at the instructions and layout:
<https://www.iassistquarterly.com/index.php/iassist/about/submissions>.


Authors can also contact me via e-mail: kbr@sam.sdu.dk. Should you be
interested in compiling a special issue for the IQ as guest editor(s) I
will also be delighted to hear from you.


Karsten Boye Rasmussen

July 2017

Editor
