+++
nid = "675"
uid = "13"
author = "jajacobs"
title = "Workshop: Providing Social Science Data Services: Strategies for Design and Operation"
tags = [ "Professional Development",]
oldpath = "/blog/workshop-providing-social-science-data-services-strategies-design-and-operation"
date = "2010-03-22 12:45:23 -0700"
draft = "false"
banner = "/img/blog/blog-placeholder.png"
+++
Announcement of Workshop: Providing Social Science Data Services:
Strategies for Design and Operation
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/courses/0041> August 9-13,
2010 Ann Arbor Michigan

Instructors: Chuck Humphrey, Head of the Data Library, University of
Alberta Jim Jacobs, Data Services Librarian Emeritus, University of
California San Diego

This five-day workshop is being offered for individuals who manage or
provide local support services for ICPSR and other numeric data for
quantitative research.

Providing access to data has taken on greater prominence over this past
decade with the emergence of several significant developments,
including, e-Science infrastructure funding, the open data movement,
national and institutional digital preservation strategies & services,
data enclaves for confidential data, lifecycle data management planning,
and data mash-up technologies on the Internet. Given these major
environmental changes, how does one plan and design appropriate levels
of data service in her or his local institution?

This workshop is structured around a five-stage data lifecycle model
that focuses on data production, data dissemination, data repositories,
data discovery and data repurposing. A day is dedicated to each stage in
this model during which discussions address issues for local data
services and computer exercises demonstrate service activities.  In this
context, fundamental data topics are  covered, including understanding
the data reference interview, working with variables, interpreting data
documentation, coping with various dissemination formats, accessing
different online services (e.g., SDA and Nesstar), searching for social
science data, subsetting data using Web-based tools, selecting and
downloading ICPSR data, and options for local data delivery. Throughout
the workshop, an emphasis will be placed on social science concepts and
terminology, as well as on practical solutions to service delivery.

Who Should Attend: Anyone who is new to providing services for numeric
social science data or is seeking to revitalize an existing service.
This is not a course in statistics and attendees are not expected to
know how to analyze data.

Online Registration:
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/2010/index.jsp>

Workshop will remain open only until the Summer Program office has
received 20 paid applications.

Questions? If you have questions about registration, fees, travel,
housing, or other courses at the ICPSR Summer program, please get in
touch with ICPSR directly:
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/contact.jsp>

If you have any questions about the workshop content, please feel free
to send email to Chuck or Jim:

Chuck: humphrey@datalib.library.ualberta.ca Jim:   jajacobs@ucsd.edu

Dates: August 9-13, 2010 Location: University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI.
Fees (Participants from ICPSR member institutions): $1,500 Fees
(Participants from institutions that are not members of ICPSR): $3,000
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/2010/application.jsp>

List of ICPSR member institutions and Official Representatives:
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/membership/ors.jsp>

Information about transportation and housing:
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/visiting.jsp>

This workshop is part of the ICPSR Summer Program in Quantitative
Methods of Social Research
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/sumprog/index.jsp>

--- Jim Jacobs
