+++
nid = "45"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes 2004"
oldpath = "/about/agm/2004agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:24 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Meeting of the General Assembly, Thursday, May 27, 2004, Madison, Wisc.

### 1. Welcome and opening remarks (A Green) 

The meeting was called to order 12:36, with 125 members present

A Green welcomed members to the conference, and to the general assembly.
She reminded members that the constitution requires of this business
meeting to process activities of the past year and prepare for the next.

### 2. Approval of the minutes of the General Assembly May 29, 2003 


The following amendments to the minutes of the 2003 General Assembly
were noted:

- 5. Should read "S. Holloway" rather than Holoway
- 8.2 Should read "The committee is no longer active"
- 9.3 Should read "The 2005 conference will be held ..." rather than 2004.

MOVED to accept minutes as amended. Moved: T Trost; seconded: C
Humphrey. The motion CARRIED.

### 3. Matters arising from the minutes (A Green) 

There being none, the president remarked on the excellent vital signs of
the Association, and the excellence of the conference arrangements. She
specifically thanked C Severt and J Linden, for their work on local
arrangement and the conference program.

### 4. Reports of Regional Secretaries 

i. Africa - The African Secretary has resigned. Refilling this position
will be part of nominations and elections this fall.

ii. Australia - S Holloway was unable to attend. The regional report
will be posted on the IASSIST web site. ASSDA is expanding, adding a
qualitative data archive and a business data archive. Have installed the
Nesstar server. There have also been breakthroughs in access to
government data. Training workshops have been held in Australia and New
Zealand.

iii. Canada - B Wandschneider: Report will be on the IASSIST web site in
next week or two. A meeting of the Canadian Association of Public Data
Users (CAPDU) is scheduled immediately after IASSIST, in Winnipeg, in
conjunction with the Conference of the Social Sciences and Humanities,
He mentioned developments in the areas of the National Data Archive, the
DDI/DTD and the creation of CanDDI to promote DDI in Canada. Several
Institutions have installed the Nesstar server. There are additional
Research Data Centres (RDCs) in Canada. He also mentioned regional
train-the -trainers meetings, and working towards a basic training
program, with close to 100% participation at institutional level.

iv. Europe - M Wright: The European report will be amended with new
information. Europe is at the bottom of a 3 year cycle coming up to a
Euro conference. She mentioned the problems of maintaining and
sustaining membership in Europe. The European report will have country
by country reports. She specifically mentioned the Madiera project, the
MetaDater project, etc. The report will be available on the IASSIST web
site in a couple of weeks.

v. United States - P Adams: Ann Cooper passed away this year. US
membership holding steady. 88 registrants at this conference. The
secretariate collaborates with other data and data related
organizations. SAA census survey included data archivists. IASSIST is a
member of COPAFS - upcoming conference on data quality in fall. APDU
conference in October. Data policy issues: Census Bureau has asked for
comments on products from the American Community Survey, although there
is little about microdata in the proposal.

### 5. Reports of Officers 

i. President and vice-president - A Green: Report was given as part of
the plenary today.

ii. Treasurer - W Thomas: The Association is in a good financial
situation . Retained membership base higher than anticipated. Recent
excellent conferences, have contributed to reserves. Have base of funds
for Outreach, to implement the Strategic Plan, etc. Changes in treasury
group: R Boily in Canada, J Dionne (US) stepping down this year.
Selected S McKay to replace her . J Dionne was thanked for her
contributions, which were critical to the success of the establishment
of regional treasurer groups . B Wandscheider is working on a new
membership database, to be unveiled this fall, and which will allow
secretariats to better track membership and assist the activities of the
assistant treasurers.

### 6. Reports of Committees 

i. Education Committee - W Watkins: The report of the Committee will be
made available on the IASSIST web site. Action plan for the next year
includes a one day leadership workshop, based on the Canadian
train-the-trainers. Expressed the importance of institutional support.
Projects ongoing include repositories of training material. Adding
section on training needs and resources. A report will also be prepared
for the IQ outlining the activities of the committee.

ii. Membership Committee - S Giles: 249 members, represents a 13%
increase. 102 have been members for at least 4 years. Looking at
regional structure - proposal put forward to the Administrative
committee to expand the Australia secretariate to include Australia and
Pacific. Produced a brochure: IASSIST at a glance. Thanks to members of
the committee, and C Perry who did the formatting, and P Baxter who put
it on the web. The new membership database will make life easier, and
allow members to change their own information as needed. Plans for next
year: study strategic plan, generate ideas on how to implement.

iii. Publications and Communications Committee - L Neidert: The annual
conference is a communications vehicle for IASSIST and a vehicle for
membership participation - providing content to IQ, web site, in the
form of media presentations for conferences, etc. C Perry was thanked
for her work on web site design and layout. Volunteers for the committee
are needed. Members are encouraged to participate in the work of the
committee, provide content or content management. Thanks to all
committee members. Volunteers should contact R Rice, KB Rassmussen, or L
Neidert.

iv. Nominations and elections committee - P Burnhill: A full range of
elections will be held this year: president, vice-president, and all
secretaries, Canada, Europe, and US. Secretaries serve 2-year terms, and
can stand for election for a second term. A Green will not stand again
as president. Administrative committee members serve 4-year terms, half
of the committee is elected in each election. Appointments not subject
to election: treasurer, secretary, archivist, chairs of action and
interest groups.

### 7. Reports of Action Groups 

i. International Outreach Action Group - I Einowski: The objective of
the action group is to assist data professionals from developing
countries. Have brought 38 participants in 8 years - this year including
T Yudina, and 2 additional persons who were unable to secure visas to
the US. Have been action group for 8 years, and need to move this into
something more permanent. About to propose the Action Group become a
committee, as part of the IASSIST structure, within the provisions of
the constitution. T Yudina - expressed thanks to the Outreach Action
Group for supporting her attendance at this professional and friendly
conference. Issued an invitation to Moscow in January 2005 for the 250th
anniversary of Moscow University.

ii. Strategic Plan Action Group - B Block: Main directions of the
strategic plan are education and preservation. A planning document was
produced in collaboration with the membership, the administrative
committee, and the members of the Action Group. Thanks to K
McNeill-Harman who "walked the extra mile." Actual document is 4
parts, this is only an abstract. Among many issues of importance, are
education, outreach, and preservation. Membership is addressed in each
of these directions. Added specific suggestions for implementation, but
open for discussion and debate. The document includes a brief paragraph
on implementing this plan. Welcome to all members to participate in this
committee.

### 8. Reports of Interest Groups 

i. Data Documentation Interest Group - R Nakao: the Action Group acts as
a forum to disseminate information from the DDI Alliance to the
membership. Looking at issues of documentation beyond DDI. Hope to
provide solid basis for publishing, implementation of the strategic plan
goals re documentation. To be placed on the IGs listserv, contact R
Nakao.

### 9. Conference Reports 

i. 2004 - C Severt

ii. 2005 - A Bayley/P Burnhill: IASSIST will meet with IFDO in
Edinburgh, in a conference with theme: "Evidence and enlightenment." P
Burnhill is program chair for IASSIST , and is in dialogue with IFDO re
an IFDO program chair. A Bayley is responsible for local arrangements.
Persons to be responsible for plenaries, general concurrent sessions and
hosts (organizers and chairs), poster coordinator, liaison with
Outreach, are being recruited. A Bayley - workshops will be held May
24th, conference May 25-27. Arrangements will include an Icebreaker
reception, and a banquet, but no boat trip. Accommodation in the
conference hotel is expensive, but there are lots of alternatives.
Followed by Highland weekend, a bus trip 100 km north of Edinburgh in
Pitlochrie, 3 nights at a bed and breakfast. The conference web site
will be active soon.

iii. 2006 - Administrative Committee has accepted a proposal from ICPSR
in Ann Arbor, for May of 2006.

iv. 2007 - Notification of intention to submit has been received from
McGill University in Montreal, Canada.

### 10. Other Business (A Green) 

There being none.

### 11.Move to adjourn 

E Boyko: seconded: J Linden. The meeting adjourned at 13:30.
