+++
nid = "689"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Minutes 2008"
oldpath = "/about/minutes-2008"
date = "2010-06-15 05:25:38 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Meeting of the General Assembly, Thursday, May 29, 2008, Stanford
University, Palo Alto, California, USA

### 1. Welcome -- *M Wright, President*

The meeting was called to order at 12:49 with about 210 (-7%) persons
present.

### 2. Approval of the minutes of the previous AGM (2007)

It was noted that the phrase 'website engineer' should be replaced by
'web site editor'.

MOVED to approve the minutes of the annual general meeting of May 25,
2006 as amended. Moved: E Boyko, L Timms-Ferrara. The motion CARRIED.

### 3. New appointments -- *M Wright*

The president announced the appointment of J Herndon to replace B Block
as member at large of the Administrative Committee, the appointment of
an archivist -- Amy West, chairing the new 'Organizational Memory
Action Group' and the appointment of Kristin Partlo as secretary.

### 4. IASSIST 2009

The program co-chairs for the 2009 conference will be B Wandschneider
and K McNeill-Harman. T Alater√§ referred to the 2009 conference web
site. The conference will be held in the same week in May as the current
conference.

### 5. Reports of officers

President & Vice-president -- M Wright & B Block

The report focused on strategic renewal, growth of the membership, and
its increasing heterogeneity. The Associations 1st strategic plan
covered the years 2004--2009. A new Strategic Plan Action Group is being
chaired by J Herndon. All standing committees are charged to examine
their mandates and spheres of activity. A discussion list will be set up
shortly to solicit views of members.

Treasurer -- J Green

The membership is stable, new rates reflecting current state of US$.
Have a surplus of $125,000 (mostly in Canadian & UK funds). The budget
for the current year was presented.

### 6. Reports of regional secretaries

Europe -- M Kleemola

There have been lots of projects and organizational changes in Europe,
including CESSDA, PPP and ESS, a third round of which data were released
last autumn. Organizational reform has occurred in Switzerland, Sweden,
etc and Finland.

Asia/Pacific -- S Holloway

National Archive in Australia has a new head.

Canada -- B Wandschneider

The Canadian report will be available on the web site. Research data
network expanding (15 RDCs and 9 branches). CIHR has formulated a new
policy on data deposit & access. CISTI is sponsoring working group on
research data in Canada. CARL data management working group.

Africa -- K Kasozi

The report will be available on the web site. There have been
developments in data curation. Some members have data archives. As a
result of an International Household Survey Network sponsored meeting in
Capetown, have formulated the following objectives: (1) platform to
identify IASSIST in the region, (2) identify all other professionals in
the region. Also establishing a Google groups forum. The secretariat
aims to so increase membership in the region, and make it feasible for
members to attend.

USA -- P Baxter

A pre-release version of the report is on the web. There have been
changes in Census Bureau leadership. DATA-PASS has funding for another
18 months from Library of Congress. And the Roper Center is advancing
the Latin American collection.

### 7. Reports of committees

Membership Committee -- L Timms-Ferrara.

Membership is growing, with approximately 20% of the membership in
Europe, 20% in Canada, and 50% in the United States. Other regions are
also growing.

Publications -- W Piovesan

The committee is charged with meeting the objectives of the Association,
and considering more initiatives. The IQ is going off print, but
implementation is progressing slowly. Proof-readers making it easier for
non-English speakers to publish. Now will turn these into
reviewed/refereed journal. Should make it more attractive for members to
publish in it.

International Outreach Committee -- P Lackie

Progress over the 11 years has been impressive. Now it is time to
rethink the objectives of this committee -- outreach may no longer fit
current climate. Members are encouraged to contribute any ideas.

Nominations & Elections Committee -- E Boyko

2009 is an election year. Per the constitution, half of the regional
representatives are to be elected for 4 year term, as well as regional
secretaries and the executive. It is time to think in terms of renewal.
Will put together a summary of what the positions responsibilities are.
In September there will be a call for nominations on the listserv. In
order to participate, members need to have paid dues by Jan 2009. The
election will use an electronic election service. By January, the
Committee with have a slate of candidates. The election itself will be
held in the first two weeks of February. Please think in terms of
nominations & ideas. Self-nomination is completely fine.

### 8. Reports of Action and Interest Groups

Technology Advisory Action Group -- B Block

Members are encouraged to think about technologies that will benefit
IASSIST, what you are doing for IASSIST, whether you can host something
for IASSIST. Also need for volunteers for developing the specifications
of tools needed to run more efficiently.

Organizational Memory Action Group -- A West

Looking for volunteers.

Strategic Plan Action Group -- J Herndon

The chair invites new members to join the planning group. Need to asses
the role IASSIST plays in libraries, archives, and information
technology more broadly.

### 9. New business -- *M Wright*

There were several brief informational announcements, but no new
business per se.

T Myscich thanked the IASSIST Outreach Committee for providing support
for the trip to the conference.

### 10. Motion to adjourn

Moved L Ruus; seconded K McNeill-Harman. The motion CARRIED.
