+++
nid = "48"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes 2007"
oldpath = "/about/agm/2007agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:25 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Meeting of the General Assembly, Thursday, May 17, 2007, Montréal,
Québec, Canada

### 1. Welcome E Boyko, President

The meeting was called to order at 12:59 with about 190 persons present.

E Boyko expressed thanks to the Local Arrangements Committee, ledt by
Anastassia Khouri and Susan Czarnocki, and the Program Committee, led by
Suzette Giles and Louise Corti.

He explained that in addition to its constitutional functions, the
annual general meeting provides an overview of what the association
does, and encouraged newcomers to get involved in its activities.

### 2. Approval of the minutes of the 2006 Annual General Meeting

MOVED to approve the minutes of the annual general meeting of May 24,
2006. Moved: T Trost; seconded, W. Watkins. CARRIED.

### 3. Business arising from the minutes

There being none.

### 4. Reports of Officers

President & Vice-president - E Boyko & M Wright

E Boyko reported that he has intervened very little in the actual
running of the association, but has mainly spent his energies on
representing the interests of it. M. Wright noted a forthcoming call for
proposals for funding of projects that further the objectives of the
IASSIST Strategic Plan. Allocated funds in 2006-2007 sent two IASSIST
members to the CODATA conference in Beijing.

Treasurer - J Green

J Green thanked the assistant treasurers R Boily and S Macdonald. The
association has three sets of accounts in three countries. A
diagrammatic overview of the distribution of the funds was presented.
The association has 3 times the annual operating budget in the bank, and
is in a healthy financial position. As well, the association has some
long term investments. Last year's expenditures were over budget. A
large portion of association revenues are from membership fees; these
fees are returned to the membership in the form of for example the
IASSIST Quarterly and the listserv. The budget for the coming year is
balanced.

### 5. Reports of Regional Secretaries

Asia/Pacific - S Holloway

ASSDA is moving to a distributed model. Currently have opened affiliates
operating in Queensland, Sydney, etc. Have also received a large grant
to set up historical census statistics for web access. Will also be
improving the qualitative archive, and embarking on a pilot project on
preservation.

ACSPRI organized the first Australian methodology conference. A National
Data Network (NADA) has been formed out of the Australian Statistical
Office. New Zealand is organizing a new data archive, in Auckland. The
full regional report will be available on the association web site.

Canada - B Wandschneider

The Data Liberation Initiative (DLI) is another year older, and has been
focusing on training programs. The full report for the region will be
posted on the web site in a week or so. There have been a number of
collaborative projects, especially DDI projects, in Canada, some in the
form of partnerships between Statistics Canada and academia, especially
to do with standards and best practices.

Members were also encouraged to try out the membership database.

Europe - M Kleemola

Reported briefly on highlights: lots of projects and organizational
changes - some connections to IASSIST, via ESS and CESSDA. The European
Social Survey (ESS) data will be available this autumn. The full report
will be made available on the web.

USA -- P Baxter

The full report will be made available on the association web server, in
English and French. P Baxter recognized Peggy Adams who has been named a
fellow of the Society of American Archivists. The Roper Center has
received an award from the New York chapter of AAPOR. The Census Bureau
has experienced resignations. The Roper Center has been active in the
Data-PASS project, as well as in another project with NARA.

Africa - E. Boyko

In the last IASSIST election, no candidate was nominated for African
secretariate. In consultation with the African attendees at this
conference, the administration is appointing K Kosozi, Ugandan Bureau of
Statistics, as the new African secretariate, drawing on the help of Y
Seid. The association is looking forward to increased activity in
Africa.

### 6. Reports of Committees

Education Committee -- W Watkins

Last year, the Education Committee organized a workshop on statistical
literacy. This year the committee has organized a panel on quantitative
literacy, the papers from which they are planning on issuing as another
themed issue of the IASSIST Quarterly. The committee is also developing
training materials on quantitative literacy. The committee also had a
presence at a conference on teaching statistics, held in Brazil last
summer. Ms Watkins is steppping down as chair, to be succeeded by A
Michele Edwards.

E Boyko thanked W Watkins for her work in focusing the Education
Committee. The new chair was asked to review the charge of the committee
with its members.

International Outreach Committee -- P Lackie

Budget last year was US$10,000. The commmittee is now looking for
funding from other organizations. An additional US$3,000 was allocated
to the Strategic Plan.

Outreach fellows this year: Welch, Woolfrey, Epeh, Kosova. Six people
from IHSN network are here. Forty-nine people have now attended since
1996, sponsored by the International Outreach Committee.

Two representatives from IASSIST attended the CODATA conference in
Beijing, and will be presenting on their experience in a sesssion
tomorrow morning.

Membership Committee -- S Giles

The Association had 275 members 2006-2007, and all appear to be here,
given the attendance numbers.The Association looks very healthy. Ms
Giles expressed thanks for the work done by B Wandschneider, M Wright, J
Green, and J Weintrop. The listserv was very active, with 664 postings
last year. New members who joined at this conference will be in the
database in the next 2 weeks.

S. Giles has been chair since 2000, stepping down to be succeeded by
Lois Timms-Ferrara.

Publications Committee -- L Neidert

Ms Neidert also stepping down as chair of the Publications Committee.
Chair is really only an umbrella role; the important work of the
committee is directed by KB Rasmussen, R Rice, and S Cannon.

KB Rasmussen - publication of the IQ is one year behind, but that's
good, because we have been even farther behind. All presenters were
urged to submit their presentations.

R Rice - her function is as web site editor, largely a volunteer
coordinator role. Highlights of the past year: membership section up to
date, posting minutes and new officers, revised flyer. New FAQ for
members. Several sections: membership, conferences, working on IQ
citations back to beginning, also scanned back issues. Working with the
membership database to harvest member institutions web sites. Wants more
input from members to share documentation eg training materials, other
documentation to share. Site search added to web site. Google analytics
provide site use statistics.

E Boyko expressed thanks also to J Weintrop for her work.

### 7. Reports of Action and Interest Groups

Technology Advisory Action Group - B Block

The new action group is looking for volunteers. Its objective is to look
at means to reduce the workload for IASSIST volunteers. Focus of this
Action Group will be on applications, those willing to host something on
their servers, etc.

Thanks to J Green for her work.

### 8. Conferences

2008 Palo Alto, Calif - R Nakao

R. Nakao issued an invitation to submit proposals for the California
conference. A big push will be made for participatoin from the Pacific
Rim and Latin America. S Cannon and E Reid are chairs of the Program
Committee. Several local volunteers have been recruited.

2009 Tampere Finland

M Kleemola and T Alaterä chair the Local Arrangements Commiteee. They
promise that the sun will be present at all times!

### 9. Nominations and elections - *C Humphrey*

Past year had an election, conducted on-line for the second time.
One-hundred sixty-two ballots were cast, which represented a 60%
turnout, the highest ever. New officers - president: M Wright;
vice-president: B Block.

Next time, the election should emphasize self-nomination, and clarify
the scope of responsibilities for each of the positions.

### 10. New Business - *M Wright*

Ms Wright thanked Ernie Boyko for his service as president over the past
years.

### 11. Motion to adjourn

CARRIED
