+++
nid = "41"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes 2000"
oldpath = "/about/agm/2000agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:24 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Annual General Meeting, June 8, 2000, Evanston, Il., USA

### 1. Call to order

The meeting was called to order at 12:55 with approximately with
approximately 120 persons present. Chair: Peter Burnhill, President.
Minutes: Laine Ruus

### 2. Welcome and announcements (P Burnhill)

P Burnhill welcomed the attendees to the 26th annual IASSIST conference.
He expressed thanks to the members of the 2000 conference Local
Arrangements Committee and introduced the Conference Co-chairs, Ann
Janda and Faye Booker, and the Program Committee chair, Diane Geraci.

F Booker thanked all those who had worked on the conference, both
Northwestern University staff and University of Chicago staff. She
reported that the 2000 conference had 159 registrants, of which 102 were
from the USA, 22 from Canada, and 35 from Europe and elsewhere. The
workshops attracted 64 participants.

### 3. Approval of the minutes of the previous annual general meeting

Moved that the minutes of the 1999 annual general meeting be approved as
presented. Moved - Tess Trost, seconded - Wendy Watkins. The motion
CARRIED.

### 4. Matters arising from the minutes

There being none, the meeting proceeded to the next agenda item.

### 5. Future conferences

#### 5.1 2001 - Amsterdam, joint conference with IFDO

E Mochmann, president of IFDO, invited IASSIST to join with IFDO in a
joint conference in 2001. He informed the meeting that the first joint
IASSIST/IFDO conference was held in 1981 on the theme of data
protection. The theme of the 2001 conference is yet to be decided by the
program committee. Cor van der Meer will chair the Local Arrangements
Committee, and Ron Dekker will be Program Committee chair.

#### 5.2 2002

Interested institutions are invited to submit a proposal to host the
2002 and 2003 conferences. Regulations re hosting IASSIST conferences
are available on the IASSIST web site. One offer has been received from
a US university to host the 2002 conference.

### 6. Reports

#### 6.1 President and vice-president's report

P Burnhill reported that the past 3 years have been spend resolving
infrastructure issues within the association, and that there are
opportunities for new avenues of work for the association. A new Action
Committee for Liaison and Representation has been formed, and new chairs
appointed of the Membership Committee and the Publications and
Communications: Membership Committee chair: Suzette Giles Publications
and Communications co-chairs: Patrick Yott and Lisa Niedert

#### 6.2 Regional secretariates

**6.2.1 Canada**

W Watkins advised that the Canadian report is available on the IASSIST
WWW site.

**6.2.2 Europe**

C van der Meer advised that the European report is available on the
IASSIST WWW site.

**6.2.3 USA**

M Adams advised that the US has no report at the present time, that the
report will be produced via a participatory process via e-mail.

**6.2.4 Australia and Africa**

Representatives of these secretariates were not present. Reports to be
made available on the WWW.

#### 6.3 Treasurer's report (W Treadwell)

W Treadwell reported that there are 3 regional treasurers: JoAnne
Dionne, Allison Bayley, and Gaetan Drolet. Membership fees have not
changed since last year. The association has one (1) year's operating
funds in the bank. Conferences tend to break even. Discretionary funds
are needed for one-time expenses, and funding of new initiatives. She
proposed raising membership fees to US$50.00 ($20.00 for students to
take effect next July (2001). The membership year has been shifted to
July through June to improve management of the process; membership fees
can be paid with conference fees.

MOVED that membership be raised from US$40.00 (US$20.00 for students),
to US$50.00 (US$25.00 for students). Moved: Wendy Treadwell; seconded:
Laine Ruus. The motion CARRIED.

#### 6.4 Membership Committee report

No report from this committee, as the chair is newly appointed. The
committee will be composed of the regional secretariates, the president,
and the chair of the committee. Responsibilities will include increasing
membership, and member services.

#### 6.5 Publications and Communications Committee (M Adams)

M Adams thanked the members of the Committee for their work. The
committee has three major areas of activity:

-   Domain name - W Piovesan reported that iassist.org, iassist.com and
    iassist.net are all taken. After some discussion, it was proposed
    that the committee seek availability of iassist.int or iassist.org.
-   IASSIST Quarterly (IQ)- W Piovesan and R de Vries discussed proposed
    format changes to the IQ, including the production of a table of
    contents with links to individual articles, and individual title
    pages for each article.
-   there was additional discussion of R de Vries' 'town crier'
    project. K B Rasmussen and R de Vries to conduct a session on
    'Whither IASSIST' at the conference.
-   IQ production team: 5 issues of the IQ have been produced since the
    1999 conference. To the team has been added Bill Block (U
    Minnesota), responsible for printing labels and mailing. J Stratford
    reported on the current status of IQ production; all but 4 papers
    from the previous conference have now been published. He encouraged
    presentors to send their papers in ascii text or MSWord, and to
    convert any purely verbal presentations into a paper.

P Burnhill thanked M Adams for her work on revitalizing the Committee.

### 7. Reports of Action Groups

#### 7.1 Outreach Action Group (Ilona Einowski)

I Einowski outlined the intent of the Outreach AG is to support
professionals from emerging economies. The first activity was in 1997.
In total 15 people have been able to attend IASSIST through this
initiative. Financial support has been through the commitment of funds
to the initiative by the Administrative Committee, and the good will of
the membership. The AG has looked for outside funding: the World Bank is
willing to entertain an application. Other sources are also being
explored. Activity thus far has centered on Eastern Europe, but the AG
would like to expand to Latin America and Asia. The AG is also exploring
fostering mentoring arrangements between emerging and established data
services.

P Burnhill announced that the term of the Outreach AG will to be renewed
for another year.

#### 7.2 Liaison and Representation Action Group

P Burnhill explained the intent of this Action Group, which constitutes
IASSISTs representation to other organizations. Such representation was
once active, but it has since lost momentum. Therefore there is need to
rethink at both national and international levels, and possibly
coordinate with the regional secretariates.

### 8. Elections

Approximately 50% of the Administrative Committee positions will be due
for re-election in the fall of 2000. A Nominations and Elections
Committee has been appointed.

### 9. Other competent business

There being none, the meeting adjourned at 13:35.
