+++
nid = "47"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes 2006"
oldpath = "/about/agm/2006agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:24 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Meeting of the General Assembly, Thursday, May 25, 2006, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA

### 1. Welcome and remarks (E Boyko)

The meeting was called to order at 12:53, with circa 180 members
present. E Boyko presented a brief overview of the structure and
governance of the Association, with a focus on the function of the
Administrative Committee and its role are a coordination of the
committees, action and interest groups, and other activities of the
Association. The Association has approximately 300 members, and 255
attendees at this conference.

A review of the Agenda: add the 2008 Conference.

### 2. Approval of the minutes of the 2005 Annual General Meeting

Moved that the minutes of the Annual General Meeting of  May 26, 2005 be
approved as circulated. Moved: L Ruus; seconded M Wright. CARRIED..

### 3. Business arising from the minutes

There being none.

### 4. Reports of Officers

#### 4.1 President & Vice-president - E Boyko & M Wright

E Boyko thanked the immediate past president, A Green. In this new role
he was invited to Moscow in Dec 2005, for a conference on secondary
analysis of data, and with a focus on the archive.

M Wright explained that since the Vice-President has no official brief,
the incumbent can largely set his or her own agenda. Recently she has
been actively engaged with the Strategic Plan. One new initiative to
further the goals of the Strategic Plan has been the establishment of a
Strategic Plan Implementation Fund. Members of the Association can apply
for funding for projects that forward the goals of the Association.
Currently, the Association has excess funds largely due to the efforts
of the past treasurer over a period of 9.5 years.

A gift of appreciation was presented to W Thomas. W Thomas thanked
regional treasurers.

#### 4.2 Treasurer - J Green

The Association has healthy balances in all accounts. She intends to
continue the hard work the outgoing treasurer put in place. Thanks are
due to the current assistant treasurers: R Boily, S Macdonald and S
Mackay.

### 5. Reports of Regional Secretaries

#### 5.1 Asia/Pacific: for S Holloway by M Wright

The Australian Social Science Data Archive (ASSDA) is establishing a
distributed data service based on Nesstar. A fuller report will be
available on the Association web site.

#### 5.2 Canada -- for B Wandschneider by S Giles

A fuller report will be available on the Association web site. Canada
has just conducted its quinquennial population census, for the first
time it was possible to fill in the census form on-line. The census
included a question as to whether one gave permission for one's
nominative information to be released in 92 years time. Canadians are
currently working on a proposal to form one ICPSR federation.

#### 5.3 Europe - M Kleemola

A fuller report will be available on the Association web site. The
European region now has a number of new members, and there a lots of
Europeans here at the conference. Two major European Union projects have
been completed: Madiera (Multilingual Access to Data Infrastructures of
the European Research Area)  and MetaDater (Metadata Management and
Production System for surveys in Empirical Socio-economic Research).
CESSDA is creating a new public data catalogue, and revising the web
page.  There is a new data archive in Macedonia. National reports were
received from 15 countries -- thanks to those who contributed. The
future will see lots of organizational changes in Europe.

#### 5.4 US -- P Baxter

US institutions can still submit information for the regional report,
and late submissions will be included in the final report which will be
posted on the web site. Several members have received awards: I Einowski
received ICPSR William H. Flanigan award, B Bordelon received 2006
Thomson Gale Award for Excellence in Business Librarianship, and J
Linden the 2006 recipient of the NewsBank/Readex/GODORT/ALA Catharine J.
Reynolds Award. She hopes to deliver next year's report en français.

### 6. Reports of Committees

#### 6.1 Education Committee -- W Watkins

Report of the Education Committee will be available on the web. The
latest IASSIST Quarterly issue is on statistical literacy. A workshop on
the same topic is being held at this conference. The committee intends
to test use of a wiki as a communication tool between conferences.

#### 6.2 International Outreach Committee -- P Lackie

Ms Lackie introduced the participants who received International
Outreach funding, as well as a number of other first-time IASSIST
attendees from Ghana Russia, and Japan.

The additional unspent funds allocated to International Outreach last
year were rolled over to this year. Therefore it was possible to fund
three participants this year, from . Ethiopia, the Philippines, and
Vietnam. Thanks to L Detterman, B Gunter & M Vardigan, who helped
extensively in the work of the committee; these three have agreed to
serve on Outreach next year as well.

#### 6.3 Membership Committee -- S Giles

IASISST has the largest membership in its history, with 88 new members
at this conference. The Membership Committee is turning its attention to
the problem of non-renewals, and the underlying causes of non-renewal.
She would like to hear from anyone planning to not renew membership.

There are upcoming changes to the membership database, as well as an FAQ
to address questions regarding membership. She thanked the assistant
treasurers, the regional secretaries, and especially J Weintrop for work
on the listserv.

#### 6.4 Nominations & Elections Committee -- A Green

The upcoming year is an election year. A call for nominations will be
issued in January, with the election to follow in February of 2007. Up
for election will be the Administrative Committee positions of
president, vice-president, regional secretaries, as well as several
members at large: 1 in Canada, 2 in Europe, and 3 for the United States.
The IASSIST election is an opportunity to get more involved in the
Association.

#### 6.5 Publications Committee -- L Neidert

The Publications Committee is very large - Association communications is
the brief of the Committee. It is actually an umbrella for a number of
sub-committees. Call for SP award, after the conference. KB Rasmussen
reported on the IASSIST Quarterly, and thanked all those doing
proof-reading and especially the editors of the special edition on
statistical literacy. S Cannon reminded those assembled of the IASSIST
blog [http://www.iassistblog.org](http://www.iassistblog.org/); postings
can be sent postings to her, or individuals can become editors. No
special permissions are needed in order to comment on existing postings.

### 7. Reports of Action Groups

#### 7.1 Data Documentation & Citation Interest Group -- G Drolet & R Nakao.

One of the goals of the Interest Group is to promote citation standards.
The meeting the previous evening focused on tools for DDI 3.0.

#### 7.2 Strategic Plan - W Block

The Strategic Plan includes three strategic goals which drive Education,
Outreach, and the IASSIST Quarterly. He urged those assembled to read
the Strategic Plan and to get involved in its implementation.

### 8. Conferences (E Boyko)

8.1 2006 -- E Boyko thanked the Local Arrangements Committee and the
Program Committee for putting together a superb conference.

8.2 2007 -- Montréal. S Giles and L Corti  are the co-chairs of the
Program Committee for the 2007 Conference in Montréal, Canada

8.3 2008 -- Stanford -- R Nakao is putting together a proposal to host
the 2008 conference at Stanford University, California.

8.4 2009 & 20010 -- The Association is seeking proposals for conference
venues.

### 9. New Business - *none*

### 10. Adjournment

The meeting was adjourned at 13:41.
