+++
nid = "33"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes of the IASSIST Annual General Assembly"
oldpath = "/about/agm/1992agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:23 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Friday, May 29, 1992, in the Concourse Hotel, Madison, Wisconsin

The meeting was called to order at 12:25. There were circa 90 persons
present.

Chair: Chuck Humphrey, President

### 1. The 1992 Conference Committee

Laura Guy thanked all members of the Local Arrangements and Program
Committees. She is very happy that IASSIST was finally able to come to
Madison, Wisc. Cindy Lew officially passed on the IASSIST banner to
Peter Burnhill representing the 1993 Local Arrangements Committee.

### 2. The 1993 Conference Committee

Peter Burnhill reported that the dates of the 1993 conference will
likely be the 11-14th of May, 1993, and the venue will be Edinburgh, the
locale of the 1976 IASSIST conference. The conference will be held
jointly with IFDO (International Federation of Data Organizations).

The format of the conference will follow previous conferences: one day
of workshops, a 3-day conference, followed by a weekend break in the
Highlands of Scotland. The theme has not yet been finalized, but will
have to do with openness, of data structures, systems, networking, and
diversity, standards, multi-national collections, data exchange, etc.

The Local Arrangements Committee (LAC) have drafted a budget and fees.
They will concentrate on providing information on housing and
transportation as soon as possible, through the IASSIST listserver. The
ESRC Data Archive will host a day before the IASSIST conference, and in
conjunction with which is also planned a tour of Suffolk villages.

The Local Arrangements Committee will link with librarians,
statisticians (Royal Statistical Society), etc. A pre- conference
promotional workshop "Can I Assist You", with international
participation, will be held in conjunction with a library conference in
Britain in September of 1992.

### 3. IASSIST Conferences 1994, and 1995

Chuck Humphrey reported that the 1994 conference will be held in
northern California, and the 1995 in Quebec, possibly in Quebec City.

### 4. Reports of the Regional Secretariats

 **4.1** Canadian Secretariat

Wendy Watkins reported the following activity in Canada over the past
year:

-   a number of new and improved data libraries in the planning stages.
    All 5 Quebec CARL Consortium member institutions have allocated
    someone to be responsible for data files. Ditto at the Universities
    of Calgary and Manitoba. University of Guelph now has joined ICPSR.
    At the University of Alberta, the Data Library has been taken over
    by the Library; similar developments are under consideration at the
    University of Waterloo.
-   Queens University has established a satellite link with the GIS
    Laboratory.
-   the CARL Consortium has expanded to include a second round of 3
    General Social Surveys files, as well as the 1991 Census of
    population products.
-   no further progress has been made in the electronic depository
    service program. Treasury Board has agreed in principle with funding
    the program, and an understanding as to what will be included in the
    program. To start, the Statistics Canada electronic DSP will start
    with microdata files.
-   the CANSIM University Base has expanded to 175,000 [sic]
    time-series. Cooperative schemes for sharing on-line access to the
    database are hatching at the University of Toronto, and between
    University of British Columbia and Simon Fraser University.
-   CAPDU had its third annual meeting in London, Ont. May 22-23, 1992.
    In additional to a full-day business meeting, a CESSDA-style
    workshop was held, with 13 participants, on data identification and
    data access issues.
-   a project has been started within Statistics Canada to 'liberate'
    Statistics Canada produced microdata files, starting with the
    'Literacy survey' which is being made available via ftp.

 **4.2** European Secretariat (Peter Burnhill)

The ESRC Data Archive now has a new director, Denise Lievesley.

The Danish Data Archives are about to become a division of the Danish
National Archives.

Changes at the Steinmetzarchief are as yet not official.

 **4.3** U.S. Secretariat (Ann Gray)

Ann Gray presented highlights from the following report of the U.S.
Secretariate, which is reproduced here in full:

Economic and social problems within the nation continue to occupy center
stage and with a general election scheduled for November few of us
expect any surprises from our government. State funded academic
institutions have experienced another phase of cuts to their base
budgets while private colleges and universities struggle to maintain
financial support for students and programs. At the same time, action on
the environment and global change are still waiting for the big
conference in Rio de Janeiro. I realize that the economic difficulties
of the U.S. are not as severe as those of our colleagues in other parts
of the world and that racism, riots, and inequality are not unique to
our society, but it is in the context of this economic and social
uncertainty that I look back on the events of the past year. All in all
we have come through in very good shape with a remarkable determination
to continue to provide data and services to all.

The generation of data continues. The number of topically focused data
archives increases. Archivists are confronted with the preservation of
machine-readable administrative records, librarians reorganize space to
accommodate hundreds of CD-ROMS and the equipment necessary to use them
and researchers explore new or different computing platforms and
software systems.

IASSIST members continue to expand their own knowledge and to share with
others their experiences. The Fall 1992 Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research Meeting of Official Representatives was a
display of the commitment and talent of our organization with U.S.
Members Dodd, Einowski, Fitchen, Geraci, Gerken Green, Gray, Guy, Janda,
Jacobs, Jones, Stephenson, and Rowe, all having roles either on the
program committee or as speakers. Judith Rowe was presented with an
award for "long and meritorious service to the Consortium." Out-going
Council member Jo Ann Dionne served on the Search Committee for a new
Director of ICPSR which in June 1991 named Richard C. Rockwell to that
post. Rowe was also appointed to a three year term on the Depository
Library Council and is serving the last year of a three year appointment
on the American Statistical Association's Census Advisory Committee.

Margaret Adams of the National Archives played a major role in a two day
workshop on Electronic Records at the Society of American Archivists
Annual Meeting which will be repeated at the National Association of
Government Archives and Records Administration and the 1992 SAA Meeting.
She also spoke at the Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference in
Pittsburgh and co-chaired the program committee for the Fall 1991
Association of Public Data Users' Conference. The Fall APDU meeting was
opened by IASSIST member and APDU Board President Pat Doyle and included
Anne Cooper as one of the speakers. It has been noticed that many of our
members have also provided assistance through their contributions to a
number of list-servers.

In most academic environments there is intense pressure to move away
from traditional mainframe computing into open, distributed systems with
file servers, personal computers and workstations. In many cases this
results in transfer of the capital cost for computing from a centralized
center to the individual. That is to say, in places where computing was
a shared expense or provided as part of the standard resourses of the
university, in much the same manner as the university library, there
seems to be a trend toward policies which will distribute the cost
directly to the users. Data archives, libraries and computing centers
which have traditionally served as data depositories and service centers
for a diverse group of researchers are struggling with the concept of
centralized services and uniform access in our new entrepreneurial
environment.

There does not appear to be a pot of gold or large source of funds to
solve our computing problems. In 1987 the Office of Science and
Technology Policy proposed a five-year strategy for research and
development on high performance computing. By the end of 1989 a program
plan had been given to Congress. The legislation was approved by
Congress and signed by President Bush last year. This legislation will
bring us the National Research and Education Network (NREN), high
performance computing systems, advanced software technology and basic
research in computer science. The Office of Science and Technology
Program identified twenty "grand challenges for which solution is
likely to be possible using systems developed under this initiative." A
list of these challenges is provided in _The Federal High Performance
Computing Program_ published by the Office of Science and Technology
Policy, September 8, 1989. All involve either biological, physical
science, or engineering problems. There is little, if any, interest in
high performance computing for social science research. NREN, which
promises something for everyone, should include us but we should take
care that at least one small bandwidth will be available for social
scientists.

### 5. Treasurer's report (Kay Worrell)

IASSIST is solvent. As of the beginning of May, the bank balance was
approx. $20,000.00.

### 6. Reports of the Round Table lunches

Round table lunches have in the past generated both papers and whole
sessions at IASSIST conferences.

 **6.1** Copyright (Sarah Cox-Byrne)

The major topic of discussion at this Round Table was a U.S. Supreme
Court decision with respect to the telephone 'yellow pages' directory,
and the copyrightability of factual information. This has implications
for the copyright status of data files.

 **6.2** Archiving and conversion (Karsten Boye Rasmussen)

The main discussion concerned archival storage media, and especially the
pros and cons of CD-ROM as a storage medium in data archives and data
libraries.

 **6.3** Confidentiality and access (Vigdis Kvalheim)

On the issues of confidentiality and access, Europe and North America
are two different worlds. In North America, the main responsibility for
protecting individual privacy is on the data providers. In Europe,
legislation puts the onus on the researchers. A major concern currently
in Europe is the legislation which requires the destruction of all
personal records after a project is over. Americans are more concerned
about access to business records, access to government records, and
linkeage issues.

 **6.4** IASSIST futures (Ilona Einowski)

Topics of discussion included what other associations IASSIST members
belong to, and the advantages to new members of IASSIST. New conference
attendees feel welcome at IASSIST, and get a chance to talk about local
problems. Are we realizing the 5-year plan, now that we are 3 years into
it? One idea by which to capitalize on the wealth of experience in
IASSIST was the creation of an IASSIST 'A-team' to fix problems that
individual members/institutions may have. Touched on the possibilities
of institutionalizing the sharing of data and expertise. Also introduced
the possibility of changing the format of the conference to 2 days of
workshops, and 2 days of conference sessions, and the possibility of
regional meetings.

 **6.5** ICPSR (Carolyn Geda)

Highlights of the discussion at this round table: ICPSR should place a
higher priority on the acquisition and release of serial data files.
Also, better information on release dates should be made available.
E.g., the Current Population Survey data files are not acquired soon
enough, and once acquired, should be released twice, once as a
hierarchical file, and a second time in the final 'flattened' version.
Scanned documentation is difficult to use, and difficult to print. And
there is no documentation of the print control characters that occur in
scanned documentation. There are problems with bibliographic citations -
citations which differ from the title pages of the codebooks. Also,
ICPSR staff should respond to OR-L listserv messages. There was also
some discussion about federal government funding for specialized
collections, such as the NSF funding for the census acquisition.

 **6.6** Text files (John Price-Wilkins)

Mr. Price-Wilkins was not present, thus no report was presented from
this round table.

 **6.7** Training data librarians (George Sharrard)

This round table was very active - most of the participants were
librarians. Discussion centered primarily around collection content
issues, as well as resources (both data and personnel), and cooperation
with other units such as the computing centre. Also discussed political
issues, such as gaining support for data services, by approaching
end-users, and knowing what university committees they are on. Also
discussed the ICPSR Summer Institute as a good program for new Official
Representatives, etc.

 **6.8** UNIX (Jim Jacobs)

The round table had held a lively discussion, mainly centering on
systems administration, disk space allocation, the death of the
mainframe, and UNIXs networking strengths.

### 7. Nominations and Elections Committee

The members of the Nominations and Elections Committee are: Karsten Boye
Rasmussen (chair), Tom Brown, Walter Piovesan, Wendy Treadwell, and
Laura Bartolo.

The Committee will present a slate of nominees for Administrative
Committee to include 2 nominees from Canada, 2 from Europe, and 6 from
the United States, from which are to be selected 1 member-at-large from
Canada, 1 from Europe, and 3 from the United States, as well as a
president and vice- president.

### 8. Constitutional amendment (Tom Brown)

A constitutional amendment, the intention of which is to separate the
functions of archivist and secretary, will be presented to the
membership in the mailing for nominees for the Administrative Committee.
A ballot on the constitutional amendment will be mailed with the vote
for Administrative Committee members and officers. The revised
constitution will then be published in the IASSIST Quarterly.

### 9. Other business

 **9.1** CESSDA (Denise Lievesley)

Ms Lievesley reported on current activities in the Council of European
Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA). CESSDA is becoming more organized
and formal, so that they can collect dues and apply for funds for
projects. Future planned activities include:

-   establishment of new data archives in Western Europe as well as
    transition countries,
-   address the need for comparative data, and better systems to access
    data from outside Europe,
-   resource sharing on a project-specific basis. Establishment of
    working groups to develop products (e.g. data generation software),
    facilities, standards,
-   SWAT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, and Threats analysis).
-   Address the problems of EC discussions of legislation prohibiting
    data collectors from asking questions on 'significant social
    factors' without written consent from interviewees. Also EC
    decision that all personal data be destroyed upon the conclusion of
    the current project.

 **9.2** World Fertility Surveys (Denise Lievesley)

The World Fertility Survey data files have been housed as the
International Statistical Institution (ISI) in the Hague. ISI is
terminating its research and education program, including the
Demographic Database. Ms Lievesley had written a proposal to UNFBAS to
fund the return of the data to owner countries as well as its deposit in
other data archives, such as the ESRC Data Archive. The data are
currently at ISI, but are no longer supported. The issue of archiving
the data elsewhere is problematic in that the data are owned by
participating countries, some of which have specified that the data may
not be disseminated to the United States. ISI would prefer to find a
data archive in the developing world, in which to house the data, rather
than at the ESRC. This decision has major financial as well as training
implications, as there is currently no data archive in a developing
country capable of managing the data.

The suggestion was raised that perhaps CELADE might be persuaded to
house the data.

 **9.3** IASSIST listserver (Judith Rowe)

The IASSIST listserver is now 1 year old. There would be no problem with
storing other files in addition to log files to make them available
through the listserver. There is also the possibility of 'sub-lists'
for special discussions.

 **9.4** APDU (Peggy Adams)

The 1992 Association of Public Data Users annual meeting will be held
November 2-4, 1992. It will be preceded by one-half day workshops on
November 1st.

 **9.4** Resolution (Don Harrison)

Don Harrison presented a resolution urging that prompt action be taken
by the U.S. government to salvage archival records from the Vietnam
conflict.

There was some discussion as to IASSISTs proper role vis-a-vis such a
purely national issue. Chuck Humphrey suggested that the U.S.
Secretariat would administer a vote of the IASSIST members only on the
resolution, that the text of the resolution should be published in the
IASSIST Quarterly with the letter that the resolution requests be
written, and that discussion of the issue be continued on the IASSIST
listserver.

A committee comprised of Ann Gray, Judith Rowe, and Don Harrison were
tasked to make a recommendation for action to the Administrative
Committee.

Further, a committee comprised of Denise Lievesley, Richard Rockwell,
and Laine Ruus, to make recommendations for action to the Administrative
Committee on the issue of the future of the World Fertility Surveys.

The meeting was adjourned at approximately 2:00 pm.
