+++
nid = "44"
uid = "1"
author = "administrator"
title = "Minutes 2003"
oldpath = "/about/agm/2003agm.html"
date = "2010-01-08 22:00:24 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Meeting of the General Assembly, Thursday, May 29, 2003 Ottawa, Ont.
Canada

### 1. Welcome

The meeting was called to order at 12:35

### 2. Approval of the agenda

An item 8d. Membership was added. The agenda were approved as amended.

### 3. Approval of the minutes

Of the 2002 meeting of the General Assembly. Moved: Ernie Boko,
seconded: Tess Trost -- The motion was Carried.

### 4. Matters arising

There being none.

### 5. Report of Nominations and Elections Committee (P Burnhill)

The Committee consisted of P Burnhill, D Geraci, W Watkins, and J
Dionne.

The Committee thanked all candidates. The results of the election are as
follows:

**President:** A Green

**Vice-president:** R Dekker

**Regional secretariats:**

-   **Africa:** J Paris
-   **Australia:** S Holloway
-   **Canada:** B Wandschneider
-   **Europe:** M Wright
-   **United States:** P Adams

**Members at large:**

-   **Canada:** E Boyko
-   **Europe:** R Rice, C van der Meer
-   **US:** L Neidert, T Trost, J Weintrop

**Members standing down:** V Merrill, W Watkins, P Yott

Thanks also to ongoing administrative committee members: L Corti, S
Giles, F Booker, C Severt, D Tsang.

### 5. Reports

#### 5.a Regional Secretariats

Africa - none, will be posted to the WWW.

Australia -- the region will report next year

**Canada** -- W Watkins
A full report will be made available on the web site. National Data
Archive - nothing has been done in the last year. Data Liberation
Initiative (DLI) is alive and well. The first national data library
training will occur this year, with representatives from coast to coast.
CAPDU also met here in Ottawa in conjunction with IASSIST. Spin offs
from DLI -- former users of DLI products who are now in the labour
force and involved with the creation of of surveys, are putting data in
our collections.

**Europe** -- M Wright
A full report will be made available on the web site. One highlight:
membership numbers have dropped, but distribution around Europe has
remained very stable, especially in eastern Europe. This is due in no
small measure to IASSIST and the Outreach program.

**United States** -- P Adams
The US region had members from US in 2002-2003. US members should make
themselves known to her. Has tried to focus on major policy issues -- a
full report will be available on the web. New legislation has been
enacted, with respect to confidentiality, and data quality. J Stratford
has an article forthcoming in Government Information. NIH now requires
deposit of data. Development of a total information awareness program in
Department of Defence. D Tsang received a Fulbright Scholarship to do an
inventory of data resources in Vietnam. B Aldrich and J Grey passed away
this year.

#### 5.b President & Vice-president (A Green)

Developments in the past year have included changes to the listserv, IQ
distribution, publication of 2 membership directories, complete revision
of the web site, election and constitutional revision, as well as a
change in the fiscal year. Outreach funding and activity has continued
to be effective. The treasury and membership committees have been very
activity, and archival consolidation has begun.

The Administrative committee voted to become DDI host institution. And
IASSIST has established a Data documentation interest group. A Green
communicated with UNESCO re preservation of digital heritage, and these
comments have been included in new draft.

Enthusiastic about next 2 years. Thanks are due to the appointed
officers for helping move forward: W Thomas (treasurer), L Ruus
(secretary), Rasmussen (IQ editor). R Rice will now be official web
editor. Thanks also to Y Hackette (archivist), P Burnhill (past
president), C Geda (Constitutional Review committee), I Einowski
(Outreach Action Group), and B Block (Strategic Plan Action Group).

#### 5.c Treasury (W Thomas)

Last year we had US$74,500, now US$74,900. The budget for next year is
a balanced budget. The financial health of the association is good.
Changes are anticipated among the assistant treasurers group, including
retirements. Gift and thanks were presented to G Drolet (assistant
treasurer for Canada). G Drolet is being replaced by R Boily.

#### 5.d Archives (A Green)

Records are being consolidated. A new archival policy will be
formulated.

### 6. Action groups

#### 6.1 Outreach Action Group (M Wright)

Budget for the Outreach Action Group for this conference was
US$3491.00. 3 applicants, offered funding to 2, but one couldn't make
it. Ms Omerzu from Slovenia has attended the conference.

#### 6.2 Liaison & Representation (R Dekker)

This activity has been folded into the Membership committee, since the
same people are involved. Discussion with African region to encourage
membership.

#### 6.3 Strategic Plan Action Group (B Block)

The action group is researching the plans of other organizations, as
well as trying to learn about IASSIST s past. Half of committee are
relative newcomers.

#### 6.4 Web Site Action Group (R Rice)

A new web site was launched last year at the meeting. Now has gone into
maintenance mode, and are stable. Putting up new content as it comes in.
But need more content. A web survey has been launched by the committee,
and members are encouraged to fill it out.

### 7. Interest groups (A Green)

Only one interest group for the coming year: Data Documentation

The Interest group needs a chair, mandate, and a mode of communication.
The executive will attempt to resolve these before the conference is
over.

### 8. Committees

#### 8.1 Publications & communications (L Neidert)

The IQ is a communications vehicle for the association. IQ almost into
2003. Anyone can submit, eg presentation from this conference, or
somewhere else, as long as it has something to do with IASSIST
objectives.

Also the committee is collecting presentation notes from conference
presentations. Some new ideas to be announced.

#### 8.2 Constitutional Review Committee (A Green)

An election was duly conducted. Proposed changes to the constitution
have been approved. The committee is [no] longer active.

#### 8.3 Education Committee (W Watkins)

Enthusiastic and committed group. Already have listserv. First need to
clarify the charge to the committee. Will be doing an inventory of
resources. Contact [P Lackie](mailto:plackie@carleton.edu) to be added
to the listserv. The proposed inventory will be an inventory of
inventories.

#### 8.4 Membership Committee (S Giles)

The committee consists of the regional secretaries, the president,
vice-president, treasurer and chair. Distribution of the membership is:
35 Canadians, 56 Europeans, 124 from US, 5 from elsewhere in the world.
Main work of the committee will be to clean up the membership database,
make it up-to-date, and link it to the listserv. Anyone who is not a
paid-up member will be removed from the listserv by Dec. 31st, and will
not receive a copy of the membership directory. Thanks to J Weintrop who
runs listserv. A new format is planned for the membership directory.
Thanks to W Thomas and W Piovesan for their work on the directory. Also
working on a flyer, format and content (C Perry).

### 9. Conference reports

#### 9.1 2003 conference (A Green)

#### 9.2 2004

To be held at Madison Wisconsin. C Severt not here. Planning for the
conference is well under way, with strong committees. Contact C Severt,
F Booker, or your regional secretary to volunteer.

#### 9.3 2005 - Edinburgh (A Bayley)

The 2005 conference will be held the week of May 24th. Program committee
to be formed. Initial contact with IFDO re a joint conference has been
made.

#### 9.4 2006 (A Green)

CFP will be sent out, and an official announcement forthcoming.

### 10. Other business - announcements

#### 10.1 C Humphrey

Thanked the Friends of IASSIST: W Liddington, W Bradley, Thanks to W
Watkins, S Mowers, MacLean (Sociometrics), E Boyko (STC) and DLI Team.

### 11. Move to adjourn

E Boyko, seconded: M Wright - Carried. The meeting adjourned 13:30
