+++
nid = "3418"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2002-2003: Europe"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2002-2003-europe"
date = "2013-05-22 14:27:43 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2002-2003
European Region

Melanie Wright
UK Data Archive
May 2003

### ***Introduction***

The past year has been a very busy time for those interested in digital
resources for the social sciences in Europe. Aside from individual and
national archive activities, there is a raft of cross-European
initiatives of interest to the IASSIST community.

The report that follows will begin with some observations on the
demographics of IASSIST European membership. I will then report on a few
of the many cross-national collaborations, after which will be
country-by-country reports of national/institutional/individual
activities. I have only included reports for those
people/organisations/countries/projects from whom I have received
information.

### ***European membership***

There are currently 53 IASSIST members from 21 countries "on the
books" for the European region. The decrease in European membership
from last year's high of 82 undoubtedly reflects the fact that the 2000
conference was held in Amsterdam, and the 2001 conference in Storrs (not
the simplest of US destinations for Europeans). The geographic breakdown
by sub-region across these to years is shown in the tables below. I am
pleased to note that although absolute numbers have dropped across all
of Europe, the proportions are not wildly different between 2001 and
2002. Although the Anglo-Scandinavian domination continues, most
encouragingly, we are maintaining a significant Eastern European
presence, despite the reduction in Outreach Action Group funding between
the 2000 and 2001 conferences. The social science data services movement
is gaining momentum in Eastern Europe, and the activities of IASSIST
have played a not insignificant role.

![](/img/about/eu03_1.gif "IASSIST European Members 2001"){width="477"
height="291"}
![](/img/about/eu03_2.gif "IASSIST European Members 2002"){width="477"
height="291"}

### ***Cross European Collaborations***

**MADIERA**

EU-funded project MADIERA (**M**ultilingual **A**ccess to **D**ata
**I**nfrastructures of the **E**uropean **R**esearch **A**rea) kicked
off in December 2002. The three-year project seeks to develop the ELSST
multilingual thesaurus, implement it within the new IDC 2 (the second
CESSDA Integrated Data Catalogue) which will be based on the ddi and
Nesstar technologies, add a graphical interface and improve the
hyperlinking capabilities to online publications and knowledge systems,
and explore ways to highlight dataset comparability and investigate
persistent naming conventions for data resources. The project will
produce a prototype IDC 2 in June 2003, releasing it in beta in December
2003, going to full release in June 2004. The next year will concentrate
on adding content and consulting with users, culminating in a second
release of the catalogue and tools in December 2005. Partners include

-   Norwegian Social Science Data Services (Co-ordinator)
-   UK Data Archive (Principal Contractor)
-   Danish Data Archive (Principal Contractor)
-   Finnish Social Science Data Archive (Principal Contractor)
-   Nesstar Limited (Principal Contractor)
-   Swiss Information Service SIDOS (Assistant Contractor
-   Greek Social Data Bank (Assistant Contractor)
-   German Zentralarchiv (Assistant Contractor)

**MetaDater**

EU-funded project MetaDater began in January 2003. The three-year
project seeks to develop standards for the description of largescale
comparative surveys over space and time, providing metatdata for
contextualising and harmonising comparative data; and also develop the
tools to create and manage this metadata. The deliverables are both a
general Data Model for comparative surveys, which could be used by any
system which deals with such data; and a specific set of tools based
upon the model. The tools are MD-PRO for data providers or disseminators
(archives, data services) and MD-COLL for data collectors or creators
(principal investigators, government/non-government organisations, etc).
The two will interoperate to form a consistent coherent metadata
management system, from survey design and fieldwork through to
preservation and dissemination, which is ddi-compatible and can directly
feed dissemination systems built on the ddi such as Nesstar/Madiera.
Partners in the project include

-   German ZentralArchiv - ZA, Coordinators
-   Danish Data Arkiv - DDA
-   Greek National Center for Social Research - EKKE
-   Netherlands Institute for Scientific Information - NIWI
-   Göteborg University - UGOT
-   Swiss Information and data archive service - SIDOS
-   Norwegian Social Science Data Service - NSD
-   UK Data Archive - UKDA

**Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA)**

The Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) is a
federal organisation that promotes the acquisition, archiving and
distribution of electronic data amongst the social science data archives
of Europe. In particular it provides a set of reciprocal agreements for
the exchange of data between countries and an infrastructure for shared
technologies and training opportunities. In March 2002, the directors of
the respective European data archives met in Ljubljana, Slovenia, for
the annual CESSDA Business Meeting hosted by the Archiv Dru?zboslovnih
Podatkov (ADP). Discussion centred on inter-working relationships
between the European archives. The meeting voted to admit two new
national members to CESSDA, CEPS (Centre d'Études de Populations, de
Pauvreté et de Politiques Socio-Économiques) representing Luxembourg and
RODA (Romanian Data Archive) at the Institute for Quality of Life
Research, Bucharest. This now takes the number of countries represented
within CESSDA to twenty-one. Also discussed was the CESSDA trans-border
data exchange agreement which is in need of revision in the light of
technological advances in distributed data dissemination and integrated
data catalogues. It was agreed that the UKDA Director should take this
matter forward in the form of a working paper with draft
recommendations. The relationship between CESSDA and the
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR),
the largest social science data archive in the world, was also discussed
with the new Director of ICPSR, Myron Guttman, attending CESSDA for the
first time. It was agreed that CESSDA should have a full representative
in ICPSR's Council, and the UKDA Director was nominated to represent
CESSDA for an initial two-year period.

This year's CESSDA Expert Seminar was organized by the Romania Data
Archive (RODA) and the Zentralarchiv für Empirische Sozialforschung (ZA)
and held together with the East European Data Archive Network (EDAN) DDI
Workshop. The seminar provided an opportunity for members of European
data archives to share their knowledge and technical expertise. By
deciding to hold the 2002 meeting in Bucharest, CESSDA was also able to
support EDAN's first DDI training initiative. Presentations and
hands-on sessions covered a wide range of topics: the DDI and XML
codebook production; XML mark-up of qualitative data; metadata; Nesstar
publishing; data access and access control; the MADIERA project;
controlled vocabularies and thesauri. A session on CESSDA cross-border
data transfer agreements was also productive.

**The East European Data Archive Network (EDAN)**

Brigitte Haustein writes:

[First EDAN Training Seminar]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

In September 2002 the first EDAN training seminar was organized in
Bucharest. It was supported by the Romania Data Archive (RODA) and GESIS
(German Social Science Infrastructure Services). The Council of European
Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) has also lent its support by
sending West European experts and arranging presentations of ongoing
projects. The CESSDA members decided to hold their annual expert seminar
in Bucharest to make sure that the experts are available for both
events.

There are a lot of European and American initiatives and developments in
the area of metadata production. At the EDAN training seminar the
participants from Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Ukraine,
Russia and Portugal were informed about these developments. Besides
background information the seminar offered the chance of learning by
doing in hands-on-computer sessions. The first day was dedicated to the
production of DDI XML Codebooks. After a short introduction given by Ken
Miller (UK Data Archive) Janez Stebe (ADP, Slovenia) guided the
participants through the production line of the Slovenian data archive.
Ken Miller continued by showing the next steps after the production of
xml codebooks. Emma Barker (UK Data Archive) introduced an example of
marking up texts generated from qualitative research. The NESSTAR
technology was predominant on the second day of the seminar. Matti
Heinonen and Mari Kleemola (FSD, Finland) presented how to set up a web
data catalogue and install a NESSTAR server. This presentation was
followed by a hands-on-computer session on the NESSTAR Catalogue and
Publisher which was chaired by Adrian Dusa (RODA, Romania).

In a joint CESSDA and EDAN session Massimilliono Gerardi (NESSTAR Ltd.)
introduced the new Access Control Unit which will be implemented in the
latest version of NESSTAR (announced for the coming weeks). Bjarne Oymyr
(NSD, Norway) presented the EU funded project MADIERA (Multilingual
Access of Data Infrastructures for the European Research Area) as a
further step towards the "Social Science Dream Machine". In the
presentation of the MetaDater (also funded by the EU) Nanna Floor
Clausen (DDA, Denmark) pointed out that the emphasis of the project is
put on the creation of a metadata management and production system for
simple to complex social science surveys.

Presentations and pictures at: <http://www.roda.ro/en/workshop.htm>

[UNESCO Workshop on Social Science Data Archives in Eastern Europe
2002]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

The workshop "Social Science Data Archives in Eastern Europe - Results,
Potentials and Prospects of the Archival Development" supported by
UNESCO/MOST Programme and the German Social Science Infrastructure
Services (GESIS) was held in Berlin on 22-24 February, 2002. The
workshop brought together representatives of the existing or emerging
data archives in Estonia, Latvia, Russia, Czech Republic, Slovenia,
Romania and Slovakia as well as researchers who are involved in data
archiving initiatives in Lithuania, Poland, Bulgaria, Ukraine and
Yugoslavia. Additionally, representatives from the Swedish, Finish,
Australian and German Data Archive shared their experience.

[East European Data Archives Mailing List:
EDAN-News]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

This mailing list is offered to foster the dissemination of news
concerning data archives and archive initiatives in Eastern Europe and
to discuss problems of data archives in general. It is a moderated
mailing list intended for a highly interested audience. The contributors
to the news list reciprocally inform on their activities, new projects
and initiatives in the field of data archiving. We also appreciate
information on promotional opportunities, grants, guest scientists,
foreign exchanges, networks, project planning, employment opportunities,
event info, etc. The language is English.

To subscribe to the list, send an email to: <EDAN-News@berlin.iz-soz.de>
with just "Subscribe" (no quotes) in the subject field.

### ***National Reports***

**CZECH REPUBLIC**

[SDA]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Jindrich Krejci writes

During 2002 SDA continued its work in all three major areas of
activities: acquiring, archiving and providing data files; promoting
data dissemination and secondary analyses; and supporting special
research projects. Highlights of the activities in 2002 are as follows:

**Acquisition of data files**

Data files from regular monthly surveys of the Institute for Public
Opinion Research (IVVM) from 1989 and 1990 were transformed into the
SPSS format, checked and included into the data library. SDA obtained
and included also new data files from the IVVM/CVVM research programme
held in 2001 and 2002. Merged data sets concerning topics such as voting
preferences, political attitudes and attitudes to the EU were prepared
on the basis of the IVVM/CVVM surveys from 1996, 1998, 1999, 2000 and
2001. SDA also acquired data from 10 surveys of the Research Institute
for Labour and Social Affairs concerning working conditions, gender
topics, life of the younger generation, etc.

**Activities of the EDAN**

SDA participated in establishing of the East European Data Archive
Network (EDAN), which was launched on conference on Social Science Data
Archives in Eastern Europe organised by the ZA in Berlin in February
2002. An informal network was designed to unite data archives sharing
common problems and to be a starting point for the application for the
6th Framework Programme. With the aim to promote adoption of new
technologies the EDAN Training Seminar on DDI was hold together with
CESSDA Expert Seminar 2002, organised by the RODA and ZA in Bucharest in
September 2002. The co-operation resulted also in a compilation of a
catalogue of available data files from EDAN archives that should form a
base for future collaboration of the EDAN network.

**Comparative research: ISSP, ESS, PISA-L**

SDA continued in its participation in the Czech part of the ISSP: data
and documentation of the ISSP 2001 Social Networks were send to the ZA
and ISSP 2002 Family was fielded. SDA also participated in preparation
of Czech survey within the European Social Survey and took part in the
team, which successfully applied for support for the PISA-L, a project
of survey of pupils and their parents (fielded in 2003).

**Analysis of quality of data**

In 2002 the project Quality of Survey Research on Electoral Preferences
sponsored by Grant Agency of the Czech Republic has been started. The
objective of the project is to organise methodological surveys and
conduct an evaluation of electoral surveys in the Czech Republic. The
SDA also participated in the expertise of the Media Project, which is a
large continual survey of periodicals reading and radio listening.

**Others**

A new person joined a team of the SDA - Yana Leontiyeva has been
responsible for data administration and has participated in most of
activities of the Archive. The Archive's information bulletin SDA Info
was published two times in 2002. The Institute of Sociology launched a
new structure of departments, the position of the SDA as a department
within the scientific research section of the Institute was confirmed.
Large floods in August 2002 had destroyed the library of the Institute
and affected the research work of all departments including SDA - its
activities were stopped due to technical problems for the period of
three weeks.

**DENMARK**

[DDA]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Hans Jørgen Marker writes

From the beginning of 2002 it was clear that The Danish National
Archives who owns the DDA was facing major budget cuts. At last years
meeting it was uncertain how these cuts would be distributed over the
different parts of the National Archives. As it turned out the National
Archive regards the DDA as a non-essential activity and thus the DDA
started 2003 with less than two thirds of the manpower it had in 2001.
The process in-between has been very painful and has drawn dark shadows
over the year.

It is by no means certain that DDA has seen the end of its troubles yet.

**FINLAND**

[FSD]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Sami Borg writes

FSD's fourth year of operation was mainly dedicated to basic data
archival development. In the end of the year FSD's holdings included
about 400 data sets. During the year FSD delivered about 250 data sets
for secondary research.

A small proportion of the data requests came from abroad. FSD translates
study descriptions in English for all the data sets archived, but this
does not apply to data files. Translation of labels is available on
request, and it causes some delay in data delivery for foreign
researchers.

In 2002 FSD continued active PR and information efforts with the archive
bulletin FSDnews (<http://www.fsd.uta.fi/fsdnewwws/english/>),
information letters to various target groups, mailing lists, visits to
national scientific conferences, and visit to university departments and
other organisations. A senior researcher was hired for eight months to
write 5-10 page reviews on various possibilities to use FSD's data.
These reviews will be published mainly in 2003 in some main Finnish
social science journals.

For about two years, FSD has developed a portal of social science
learning environment for using quantitative methods and secondary data.
It combines a hypertext textbook on basic methods, a Finnish on-line
manual to SPSS, some subsets of FSD's data, and different teaching
material (like exercises, slides etc.). The project started in 2000 with
FSD's own seed money, and in 2002 we managed to fund about 60 % of the
project from the Finnish Virtual University funding sources. For the
moment, the portal is available in Finnish only.

**THE NETHERLANDS**

[NIWI]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Cor van der Meer and Heiko Tjalsma write:

Both archives are part of NIWI, the Netherlands Institute for Scientific
Information Services. At the end of last year the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences of the Netherlands made its decision public
that NIWI as it is currently organised will cease to exist in the near
future. One committee has been formed to advise about the future of the
growing research part of NIWI; another committee has been established to
advise about the organisation and structure of the information services
of NIWI, including the Steinmetz Archive and the Historical Data
Archive.

There is another international committee working on advice for the
Academy about the general data-infrastructure for the Social Sciences in
the Netherlands. Several institutions as the Netherlands Research
Council (NWO) and a number of Universities will take part in its ongoing
discussions. At this moment it is not known what the new configuration
will look like, but there is no doubt that the Data Archives will
continue their services, either together or apart.

**The Steinmetz Archive**

It has been a busy year for the Steinmetz Archive. This is due not only
to an ever-increasing number of clients, but also to the implementation
of the new back-office system DDDI, which is DDI compliant and took
quite some effort. The DDDI system replaces several databases and makes
it possible to handle information about depositors, clients, workflow,
and of course the study descriptions, all in one database.

Other projects in which the archive is involved are MetaDater and the
development of a Question Bank for the Social and Cultural Planning
Office. This question bank is designed around a special series of
studies named "Cultural Change in the Netherlands", ongoing from 1975.
The question bank makes it possible to follow the formulation of
questions through time and even to construct new questionnaires. At the
moment this database is being filled with content. The experiences of
this project will eventually be used to develop an even larger question
bank for the Steinmetz Archive.

The early notification of the discontinuation of NIWI has made it
difficult to secure funds for projects at the moment. Some of the
planned projects, for example the feasibility study on a qualitative
data archive, have had to be delayed for this reason.

**NNHDA**

In the period May 2002 - April 2003 The Netherlands Historical Data
Archive has carried out or is still carrying out several research
projects. In April/May 2003 the ADA-project (Archiving Digital Academic
heritage) will be finished. This is a pilot project in the field of
long-term preservation of digital scientific or scholarly research
material. Central question was the feasibility of setting up digital
archiving services for the academic world.
Another research project, which has started in April 2003, is the
Xtensible Past pilot project. Its aim is to explore the possibilities of
XML (eXtensible Markup Language) and OAI (Open Archives Initiative) for
providing better access to and sharing of digital data collections by
researchers as well as investigating XML as a new strategy for the
long-term preservation of research data.

Finally also the large 'Life courses in context' project should be
mentioned, funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO), which started late 2002. This is both a data-entry and
an archiving project. It is carried out in collaboration with the HSN
(The Historical Sample of the Netherlands). The programme's objective
is to develop a database containing about 40,000 individual life courses
of people born in the period 1863-1922.

**ROMANIA**

[Romanian Social Data Archive
(RODA)]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Adrian Dusa writes:

During the last year, RODA went on a positive trend; it strengthened its
position in the academic community, it developed and enlarged the data
catalogue and began disseminating the data.

To better understand the activities that we undertook, we must start
with the fact that we collected only the available datasets from the
Romanian research institutes. These datasets were in no condition suited
for data archiving: poor labelling, poor cleaning, and no documentation
whatsoever.

Our task was primarily related to adding value.

We cleaned the datasets, verified the correspondence between the
questionnaire and dataset, and created the metadata undertaking a work
similar to archaeology, especially for the "old" datasets; this being
followed by a translation process which is currently under way.

This time-consuming major project had two main results:

1.  High quality datasets for our data catalogue
2.  Best-practice for data documentation

We plan to use this best-practice material and send it to the Romanian
research institutions interested to archive their data at RODA. This
will help us to lower the workload and improve the disseminating
process.
In the following months, we plan a marketing action with leaflets and
promotional CDs for popularising purposes.

The year 2002 was a very active one:

-   March 2002: RODA was accepted as a member in CESSDA;
-   May 2002: we officially launched our data archive, being honoured by
    the Rector of the University of Bucharest and by the Dean of the
    Faculty of Sociology and Social Work; professors from the major
    Romanian Universities were present as well;
-   September 2002: RODA organized the DDI Workshop and the CESSDA
    Expert Seminar, with about 30 participants from Eastern and Western
    data archives;
-   October 2002: RODA strengthened the relationships with the other
    Romanian universities and research institutes, paying visits in 8
    large cities. We gave about 20 presentations at various institutions
    during this activity, encouraging them to deposit their data;
-   December 2002: RODA had a presentation at the ISSC Conference in
    Vienna, applying for membership in IFDO.

**SPAIN**

[Centre for Advanced Studies in the Social
Sciences]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Martha Peach writes

Under the directorship of Almudena Knecht, the Library of the Centre for
Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences of the Juan March Institute is
constructing a digital archive of some 60,000 articles from 11 Spanish
newspapers that mirrors Spain's transition to democracy.

Spain's transition to democracy is one of the most cited cases of a
successful and peaceful regime change of the twentieth century. It is a
model studied and admired by the international community and imitated by
a large number of countries in their own political reform process. The
central object of this project is to provide a unique tool for the study
of transitions to democracy, using as an example the Spanish case
through the clipping archive selected and organized by Prof. Juan Linz.

The archive of over 60,000 articles is in such a delicate condition that
the needs for its preservation conflicts directly with the corresponding
need to make the archive available to researchers and students of
transitions to democracy. Using current technology the archive will be
preserved and will be freely available on the Internet with searching
capability by a multitude of identifiers as well as full text searching.
The articles will also be viewable and downloadable as a graphic image
and they will be available as a text file.

Since we did not want to provide just a meta-data catalogue of the
archive but rather provide a virtual archive with a catalogue and with
enhanced searching and retrieval capabilities, we decided to include
some new elements into the "tool box" of the archive's user
interface. The most innovative element is the ability to use normalized
fields as variables and thereby construct databases for use with SPSS or
other statistical software. The normalized fields include register
number of the article, author, name of newspaper, page, article length
(represented by number of paragraphs), source of information, date,
descriptors, type of article. Therefore a researcher wanting to do an
analysis of newspaper coverage of a topic such as abortion could
download the metadata of all articles that included the descriptor (or
even the word "abortion", since there will be full text searching
capabilities), then load the meta data into a data analysis program. By
doing cross tab or other type of analysis the researcher would be able
to do an analysis of volume of articles by date element or by newspaper
or by type of article or by source of information used by the author of
the article, etc. It is hoped that the researcher would also be able to
click on the register number to retrieve the digital image or the text
file, to enable confirmation of variables etc.

The project involves the development of five elements: a database
registering each article, a thesaurus of descriptors, a graphic image
archive, a text archive, searching screens with download, secondary
analysis and printing capabilities.

The design work and the infrastructure of the project are open ended in
that it can be applied to other archives. It is hoped that the project
will generate spin off projects that will expand the coverage of the
Spanish transition as seen in the press of other countries as well as
reflected in other archives of interviews, personal archives of people
of the transition, etc. Much of the design work is also applicable for
treatment of similar archives of other regime transitions.

**SWEDEN**

[SSD]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Lennart Brantgarde writes

The SSD has over the last several months undergone an evaluation by the
Swedish Research Council on initiative by the Swedish government. The
report was released in early March and has recently been sent to the
government.

After having given the actual picture of the usage of the SSD services
for the last five years and some plans for new and additional tasks, the
report tells about a highly under-financed situation. This has mainly to
do with the present status under a single university faculty where for
many reasons little can be done financially to keep up the budget
balance. The report discusses two alternatives for a change of principal
body: the National Archive and the National Research Council out of
which the second body is clearly favoured and suggested. The change of
Principal body should not have any consequences for the location of SSD
which should continuously have Göteborg as site. In addition the report
advocates a 100% increase in annual budget. The report also underlines
the importance of a board of a more national mix and of especial
importance would be the inclusion of people from leading financing
bodies and councils.

It now remains to be seen how the Swedish government will add its final
say.

In the meantime the services at the SSD have continued along well-known
lines. New data have been added and slight increases in demand and
disseminations can be noticed in accordance with long-term trends from
the last several years. Cooperative projects with various Swedish
research groups pop up now and then resulting in documenting endeavours.
The participation in a major cooperative EU project has been very
favourably received within the organisation and added another bucket of
fresh air.

**SWITZERLAND**

[SIDOS]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

In many ways, the year 2002 was not exceptional for SIDOS. We were busy
with the distribution of datasets and the acquisition of new surveys,
with an increasing collaboration of researchers. At the same time, more
and more people used the website of SIDOS. Nevertheless, some aspects
have to be stressed:

-   The new version of the National Science Foundation directives has
    now an article on the need to archive important research results.
-   SIDOS has published a survey on the satisfaction of Swiss
    researchers with the National Science Foundation.
-   SIDOS has been responsible for the European Social Survey (ESS) for
    Switzerland, showing that it could be of interest to link the
    knowledge of datasets with knowledge of the field.
-   Finally, SIDOS has had its 10th anniversary in 2002, which
    culminated in a scientific colloquium on "Social change, change of
    the Social Sciences" with the presence, among others, of Kevin
    Schürer of UKDA, as well as a roundtable with a selection of Swiss
    scientific authorities. This was also the occasion to publish a
    CD-Rom showing the richness of the data at SIDOS, new way to access
    data, various directions for new developments, including the
    integration of research, methods, and data.

All this shows that SIDOS has now found a place in the Swiss scientific
landscape.

**UNITED KINGDOM**

[EDINA]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

Robin Rice and Peter Burnhill write:

We report developments over the past year at national (UK & Scotland)
and at local (Edinburgh) level, with reference to some happenings on the
wider European and International scene.

Of special note is that Edinburgh University Data Library celebrates its
20th anniversary this year - 2003, marked by launch of re-organised
website - datalib.ed.ac.uk. This coincides with several changes within
the University: the appointment of new University Principal from an
Informatics background who is putting the goals of e-learning and
widening participation to the fore. Reorganisation has also put
Humanities and Social Sciences into one of 3 Colleges, and we await the
appointment of our new Vice-Principal (Knowledge Management). Scope of
data services includes the 2001 Census data that is becoming available,
multimedia (see EMOL below) and use of digital map data, with several
training courses for each. The significance of NESSTAR and the new ESDS
for delivery has increased.

The EDINA National Data Centre now has 42 staff, three in a college of
further education, having launched a new service, Education Media
Online, allowing download of documentary films, and won the contract,
with Ex Libris, to set up SUNCAT (the Serials Union CATalogue for the
UK). These feature in EDINA's new website with multiple use views:
edina.ac.uk, a sign that presentation to specific communities matters.
It has also been a year of collaboration in successful project
activities: with MIMAS in supporting the National Learning Network and
developing a national digital repository for learning materials (JORUM);
with History Data Service in developing a Geo-Portal and a gazetteer
broker; with several, including the British Library, in JOIN-UP, portals
and brokers to assist use of journal literature. There is also
opportunity to collaborate in the new eSocial Science initiative.

At UK level, the JISC, often in conjunction with the Research Councils
and the like, continue to provide significant funding towards the
development of a Common Information Environment for the UK, with
competing emphasis on eLearning, eScience and life-long learning
objectives. Of particular importance in Scotland is ensuring a good
subscription base for the Statistical Accounts of Scotland. Funding has
also been secured for Topar an Dulchais, a national corpus of 15,000
hours of digitised Gaelic Voice and Song. Across Europe, participation
in the Sixth Framework is being worked out, as is collaboration with
Internet2, not least in projects to do with authentication,
authorisation and profiling.

[MIMAS]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

**New web interface to OECD data**

OECD Main Economic Indicators are now being delivered via Beyond 20/20.
This replaces our previous delivery software, TimeWeb Explorer.

Beyond 20/20 can accommodate the wide range of international databanks
we will be delivering under the new Economic and Social Data Service
(launching in June this year). Moreover, it is used by many governmental
and intergovernmental organisations for the dissemination of time series
and has emerged as the standard software for the delivery of this type
of aggregated data.

Data access will remain at the same location:
<http://timeweb.mimas.ac.uk;> you will need an Athens username and
password to use the software. The help pages and Beyond 20/20 interface
are under development and any feedback would be welcome, please email:
<international@esds.ac.uk>.

**IMF data**

The IMF has agreed to give UK academics access to the statistical
databanks produced by the IMF for a five-year period. This has been made
possible by the establishment of the Economic and Social Data Service of
which the ESDS International Data Service (supported by MIMAS) is part.
Access to the IMF databanks will be free to authorised academic users.

The databanks provide a very complete picture of national finance,
economic development, balance of payments components and international
trade for countries around the world. This agreement will make it easier
for UK academics wanting to use international data in research or
teaching to obtain access to reliable and continuously updated
statistics relating to global economic activity.

**Census Services**

The ESRC has undertaken a formal evaluation of the Census Dissemination
Unit (CDU) for the period 1997 to 2002. The evaluation process is based
on peer review of the End of Award Report and publications nominated by
the award holder. The CDU has been awarded a grading of "Outstanding:
High quality research making an important contribution to the
development of the subject". An Outstanding grade indicates that a
project has fully met its objectives and has provided an exceptional
research contribution well above average or very high in relation to the
level of award.

There has been a significant increase in the use of the aggregate
statistics from the 1991 Census (LBS/SAS) as revealed in the following
graph. This reflects the advent of the new one-stop census registration
system that went live in August 2002 and removed one of the major
barriers to using census data in research and teaching. It also reflects
increasing interest in the census prior to the release of the 2001
census outputs. Since August 2002, over 3,000 registered users from 173
institutions have run a total of over 22,000 Casweb sessions.

**Archives Hub**

MIMAS is delighted to announce that the JISC has approved funding for
the Archives Hub service for a further three years. This will allow the
service to continue to provide access to descriptions of archival
materials throughout the United Kingdom. There are currently over 13,000
collections described on the Hub, ranging from papers and photographs to
electronic datasets. Over 60 institutions have their collections
represented in the service. The service is available to everyone at
<http://www.archiveshub.ac.uk>.

A significant area of work for the Archives Hub team in recent months
has been the creation and fine-tuning of a new version of the software
on which the service is run. This will allow contributing institutions
to host their own version of the software, giving them the ability to
create, edit and delete archival descriptions locally, instead of having
to send them to a central database. The descriptions will still be
accessible through the main Archives Hub service (thanks to a nightly
"harvesting" process), but will also be searchable from a local web
interface at the holding repository.

The other main area of research for the new period of funding will be
focusing on the creation of software which will support the creation and
sharing of name authority files. These can provide biographical and
background information about individuals and organisations, as well as
standardised versions of names.

A new "Call for Content" will be issued by the JISC shortly, to allow
institutions to bid for funds for the creation of further descriptions
of their archives for inclusion in the service.

Development work on the Archives Hub is undertaken by the Cheshire
Development Team at the University of Liverpool. The service is overseen
by CURL (the Consortium of University Research Libraries) and delivered
by MIMAS.

[UK Data Archive]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

The most important news from the UKDA in this period is that it was
engaged in a prolonged bidding process to continue the range of services
it undertakes on behalf of the ESRC and JISC. This process was concluded
in the latter part of 2002 and we are pleased to announce a highly
successful outcome. Funding has been secured for an initial five years
(extendable to eight years following a mid-term review) for a new
Economic and Social Data Service (ESDS), which became operational in
January 2003. ESDS is managed by the UKDA and run as a joint venture
between the UKDA and UK Longitudinal Studies Centre (ULSC) at Essex, and
both MIMAS and the Cathie Marsh Centre for Census and Survey Research
(CCSR) at the University of Manchester.

A key feature of ESDS will be the development and maintenance of a more
integrated approach to data archiving and dissemination, establishing a
strategic vision that produces greater interoperability and synergy
between the varied ESRC and JISC portfolio of social science data and
information resources. In line with this policy, early goals for the new
service will be to create a 'one-stop-shop' authenticated registration
and data access system, together with a social science data 'Universal
Portal'. Both will aim to provide more seamless and easier access to a
range of disparate resources.

Within ESDS, the UKDA will continue to operate its central rôle in the
acquisition, preservation, dissemination and promotion of social science
data. This will be further augmented by MIMAS providing a new specialist
service giving online access to a large collection of international
macro time-series data. Equally, the CCSR will work to provide data
enhancements to a number of heavily used government surveys, as well as
organising a number of specialist training events and user support
activities relating to these data.

The UKDA will continue to host a specialist unit for the support of
qualitative data (Qualidata) that will place an emphasis on the creation
of enhanced, online qualitative data resources within ESDS. The UKDA
will also work with the ULSC to both develop and provide a number of
data enhancements that will facilitate the use of existing longitudinal
data collections. The overall management and co-ordination of ESDS will
take place through the UKDA.

Against this background of bidding and preparation for the new service,
the UKDA managed to launch a number of exciting new initiatives and
extend both the quality and quantity of services provided for its user
community. Highlights include:

-   integration of the Qualidata unit into the UKDA;
-   launching of a new instant Download dissemination service;
-   an increase of 65 per cent in the number of datasets disseminated
    (=14,295);
-   an increase of 199 per cent in the number of orders serviced
    (=5,780)
-   an increase of 75 per cent in the number of users serviced (=1,736);
-   an increase of 21 per cent in the number of datasets processed
    (=622);
-   launching of the new Census Registration Service;
-   publication of Preserving and Sharing Statistical Materials;
-   preparation of a new Digital Preservation Policy
-   completion of an in-depth study of data sharing and preservation for
    the Medical Research Council

Melanie Wright
Colchester, May 2003
