+++
nid = "1079"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2006-2007: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2006-2007-united-states"
date = "2010-11-26 05:47:58 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2006-2007
United States
Pam Baxter
Cornell University
May 2007

[français](#fr)

[]{#en}

### National Statistical Agencies

Events at the U.S. Census Bureau generated quite a stir, the most
important one being the resignation of Director Charles Kincannon and
Deputy Director Hermann Habermann in November 2006. Mr. Kincannon cited
"shifting priorities" and "changing family responsibilities" as his
reasons for stepping down, although he continues as Director pending
nomination and confirmation of his replacement. Jay Waite now holds the
post of Deputy Director.

Despite turmoil at the top, planning for Census 2010 continues with the
release of [a report to
Congress](www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2007/subjects_notebook.pdf)
describing questions that will be included in the Census and the
American Community Survey. Census has also proposed [revised
criteria](http://www.census.gov/geo/www/psap2010/psapcriteria.html) for
census tracts, block groups, and census designated places, and these
appear in the Federal Register.
[www.census.gov/geowww/psap2010/psacriteria.html] Census maintains
that planning for the next decennial census is on schedule.

A Government Accounting Office report recommended that the Office of
Management and Budget examine the status of existing federal household
studies to determine unnecessary duplication. Despite initial protests
from researchers and others, the Survey of Income and Program
Participation will be replaced by the Dynamics of Well-Being System.
DEWS will continue to measure movements into and out of government
transfer programs within the context of family and social interactions,
but rely more on administrative records for information gathering.

### Transitions, Recognitions, and Professional Activities

Peggy Adams of the National Archives and Records Administration was
named a Fellow of the Social of American Archivists and received the
award in August 2006 at the joint annual meeting of SAS, Council of
State Archivists, and the National Association of Government Archives
and Records Administrators. She was recognized as "a tireless champion
for the preservation, effective use, and management of electronic data."
The distinction of Fellow is the highest honor awarded by SAA and
recognizes outstanding contributions to the archival profession.

This winter Daniel Epeh of the Ghana AIDS Commission (a new IASSIST
member and an International Outreach Fellow this year) and Paula Lackie
have begun work on coordinating a series of internships and
service-learning projects for students from Carleton College in Ghana.
Beginning the summer of 2007, we will send students to work with his
organization to help prepare for their coming national AIDS conference.
Next winter break Paula will take students to assist him in some of
Daniel's data projects. The intent will be to coordinate with other
IASSIST members in Africa and IASSIST member Pascal Heus, whose
data-related work developing economies may overlap. As Paula notes,
"this project couldn't have happened without our networking within
IASSIST."

Wendy Thomas was a visiting faculty member at GESIS-ZUMA in Mannheim in
October 2006. She conducted an external review of the MISSY system and
worked on a DDI 3.0 article with Joachim Wackerow. In addition, she is
the author of "Data Distribution and Cataloging" (in *Encyclopedia of
Social Measurement*, Volume 1, edited by Kimberly Kempf-Leonard.
Amsterdam; Boston: Elsevier Academic Press, 2005).

There have been significant contributions to DDI developments:

Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 1
Overview (Version 3.0) for Public Review, Wendy Thomas, Arofan Gregory,
I-Lin Kuo, Joachim Wackerow, and Chris Nelson (February 2007)
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_I_Overview_pr.pdf>]

Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 2
High-Level Documentation (Version 3.0) for Public Review, with Wendy
Thomas, J Gager, Arofan Gregory, and Chris Nelson (February 2007)
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_II_High_Level_Documentation_pr.pdf>]

Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 4A
Field-Level Documentation (Version 3.0) for Public Review, with Wendy
Thomas, Arofan Gregory, Mary Vardigan, Sanda Ionescu, Ann Green, and J
Gager (February 2007)
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_IVA_Field_Level_Documentation_pr.pdf>]

### Developments in IASSIST Members' Institutions

The [Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research](http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu) was involved in a number of
projects involving data acquisitions. The Mexican University, Centro de
Investigación y Docencia Económicas (CIDE) and the Roper Center are
teaming up to expand the collection of survey research available from
Latin America. This collaboration will begin shortly and the two
institutions will be seeking grant funds to secure data from the various
polling organizations in Latin America. This effort will build upon an
already robust collection of this regional survey data archived at the
Center. The Library of Congress funded
[Data-PASS](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DATAPASS/) project has proved
productive in securing copies of hundreds of United States Information
Agency (USIA) data files collected during the 1950s-1980s that were in
the NARA collection. These studies will be fully integrated into the
Center's archives, upgraded to current formats, and made available
during the coming months. Finally, in January an agreement was reached
with CNN to continue to archive their surveys at the Center under their
new arrangement with the survey house, ORC Worldwide. Last summer, the
New York Chapter of the American Association for Public Opinion Research
presented its 2006 Outstanding Achievement Award to the Roper Center.
The Center was honored at the July meeting for its work in preserving
and documenting the "voice of the people" for more than 70 years and its
commitment to see the data made broadly available. In July, Mark
Abrahamson assumed the directorship of the Roper Center. Mark, a
sociologist who specializes in methods and theory, served for a number
of years on the board of directors of the Center. He has been actively
involved with programs to expand Roper Center usage on the University of
Connecticut campus, project proposals, and the CIDE and Data-PASS
initiatives. (Contributed by Lois Timms-Ferrara)

At the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the Data and Program Library
Service (DPLS) merged with the data services previously housed in the
Center for Demography and Ecology and the Center for Demography of
Health and Aging (CDHA). The combined unit is named the [Data and
Information Services Center](http://www.disc.wisc.edu/) (DISC). All
services available before the merger will continue: reference,
instruction, data archving, and access to social science data sources.
(Contributed by Cindy Severt)

Gretchen Gano (librarian for administration and government information
at New York University) and Julie Linden (government information
librarian at Yale) undertook a pilot project to analyze and document the
major challenges of long-term access to government information. Their
pilot focused particularly on numeric data. Details about the project,
including a draft workflow for migrating data from CDs and a link to
their October 2006 Federal Depository Library Conference presentation,
are
available here: <http://www.library.yale.edu/govdocs/cdmigration/>.
(Contributed by Julie Linden)

There was a major release of the historical aggregate census data and
boundary files (1790-2000) in the Minnesota Population Center [National
Historical Geographic Information System](http://www.nhgis.org/)
(NHGIS). The release includes county and state level information
(1790-2000), tract level data (1910-2000), full geographic coverage for
1970-2000, and boundary files for counties (1790-2000) and tracts
(1910-2000). NHGIS was funded by the National Science Foundation.
(Contributed by Wendy Thomas)

[English](#en)

[]{#fr}français:

### Les agences nationales de statistique

Une certaine agitation a fait suite aux événements qui se sont produits
au *U.S. Census Bureau* (Bureau de recensement des USA). Le plus
important d'entre eux a été la démission en novembre 2006 du directeur
Charles Kincannon et du directeur adjoint Hermann Habermann. Monsieur
Kincannon a cité comme raisons de son départ «des changements de
priorités » et «des changements dans les responsabilités familiales».
Néanmoins il restera en place jusqu'à la nomination de son successeur
et la confirmation de son remplacement. Jay Wate détient maintenant le
poste de directeur adjoint.

Malgré ce tumulte au sommet, la planification du recensement de 2010
suit son cours avec [la parution d'un rapport au Congrès
américain](www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2007/subjects_notebook.pdf)
décrivant les questions qui seront incluses dans ce recensement et dans
l'enquête 'American Community Survey'. Le *U.S. Census Bureau* a
également proposé une révision des critères utilisés dans les secteurs
de recensement, les 'block groups' (groupes de quartiers, de bloc) et
les lieux sélectionnés pour le recensement. Ces critères apparaissent
dans le registre fédéral à l'adresse :
<http://www.census.gov/geo/www/psap2010/psapcriteria.html> Le *US Census
Bureau* maintient que le prochain recensement décennal est dans les
délais.

Le rapport du *Government Accounting Office* a recommandé que l'*Office
of Management and Budget* examine l'état des enquêtes fédérales
existantes sur les ménages afin de déceler des redondances inutiles.
Malgré des protestations initiales de chercheurs et d'autres,
l'enquête 'Survey of Income and Program Participation' sera remplacée
par 'Dynamics of Economic Well-Being System' (la dynamique du système
du bien-être économique). DEWS continuera a mesurer les changements au
sein et à l'extérieur des programmes de transfert gouvernemental
(government transfer programs) dans un contexte familial et
d'interaction sociale, mais tiendra davantage compte des dossiers
administratifs pour la collecte d'information.

### Changements, reconnaissances et activités professionnelles.

Peggy Adams, des *National Archives and Records Administration*
(Administration Nationale des archives et dossiers) a été nommée
'Fellow' (experte) des archivistes américains dans le domaine des
sciences sociales et a reçu le prix en août 2006 lors de la réunion
annuelle conjointe du *SAS*, du *Council of State Archivists* (les
archivistes du Conseil d'Etat) et de la *National Association of
Government Archives and Records Administrators* (association nationale
des administrateurs des archives et dossiers gouvernementaux). Elle a
été reconnue comme "une championne imbattable pour la conservation,
l'utilisation efficace et la gestion des données électroniques". La
distinction de 'Fellow' est la plus haute reconnaissance attribuée par
*SAA (Society of American Archivists)* et signifie une contribution
exceptionnelle à la profession d'archiviste.

Cet hiver, Daniel Epeh de la commission Ghana AIDS (SIDA) (un nouveau
membre de l'IASSIST, qui a été nommé 'International Outreach Fellow'
cette année (Fellow au niveau international)) et Paula Lackie ont
commencé un travail de coordination d'une série de stages et de projets
de service-apprentissage pour les étudiants du *Carleton College* au
Ghana. Dès l'été 2007, nous enverrons des étudiants pour travailler
avec cette organisation et aider à la préparation de leur prochaine
conférence nationale 'AIDS'. Lors des prochaines vacances d'hiver,
Paula prendra des étudiants pour assister Daniel sur ses projets de
données. Le but étant de coordonner le travail des membres de IASSIST en
Afrique et celui de Pascal Heus, également membre de IASSIST, dont les
données liées aux économies en développement pourraient se recouper.
Comme Paula l'a fait remarquer : «ce projet n'aurait pu avoir lieu
sans notre réseau IASSIST».

En octobre 2006, Wendy Thomas s'est rendue au GESIS-ZUMA à Mannheim en
tant que membre invité de la Faculté. Elle a mené une évaluation externe
du système MISSY et a travaillé sur un article DDI 3.0 ('Data
Documentation Initiative') avec Joachim Wackerow. De plus, elle est
l'auteur de «Data Distribution and Cataloging» (article de
l'Encyclopedia of Social Measurement, Volume1, édité par Kimberly
Kempf-Leonard. Amsterdam; Boston: Elsevier Academic Press, 2005)

Voici listées ci-dessous les contributions significatives au
développement de la norme DDI:

*Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 1
Overview (Version 3.0) for Public Review, Wendy Thomas, Arofan Gregory,
I-Lin Kuo, Joachim Wackerow, and Chris Nelson (February 2007)*
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_I_Overview_pr.pdf>]

*Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 2
High-Level Documentation (Version 3.0) for Public Review, with Wendy
Thomas, J Gager, Arofan Gregory, and Chris Nelson (February 2007)*
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_II_High_Level_Documentation_pr.pdf>]

*Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Technical Specification: Part 4A
Field-Level Documentation (Version 3.0) for Public Review, with Wendy
Thomas, Arofan Gregory, Mary Vardigan, Sanda Ionescu, Ann Green, and J
Gager (February 2007)*
[<http://www.ddialliance.org/DDI/ddi3/DDI_3.0_Part_IVA_Field_Level_Documentation_pr.pdf>]

### Les évolutions dans les diverses institutions des membres d'IASSIST

Le *[Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research](http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu)* a participé à de nombreux
projets permettant l'acquisition de nouvelles données. Le *Centro de
Investigación y Docencia Económicas (CIDE)* de L'université du Mexique
et le *Roper Center* ont décidé de s'associer pour élargir la
collection de sondages et d'enquêtes disponibles pour l'Amérique
latine. Cette collaboration débutera très bientôt et les deux
institutions vont rechercher des financements pour sécuriser la
conservation de ces données, provenant de diverses institutions de
sondages en Amérique latine. Le fruit de cet effort viendra renforcer
une collection, déjà conséquente de sondages relatifs à cette région,
qui est archivée au *Roper Center*. La Bibliothèque du Congrès a financé
[le projet Data-PASS](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DATAPASS/) qui s'est
révélé efficace dans la sécurisation de copies de centaines de fichiers
de données de l'*United States Information Agency (USIA)*, datant des
années 1950-1980 et appartenant à la collection NARA. Ces enquêtes
seront intégrées en totalité dans les archives du Centre, formatées
selon les normes actuelles et pourront être consultées dans les mois à
venir. Enfin, en janvier, un accord a été trouvé avec le CNN pour
continuer à archiver leurs enquêtes au Centre dans le cadre de leur
accord avec la maison des enquêtes ('*house survey'*), l'*ORC
Worldwide*. L'été dernier, la remise du prix «Outstanding Achievement
Award» du *New York Chapter* de l'*American Association for Public
Opinion Research* (Association américaine de sondages et d'enquêtes
publics) a eu lieu au *Roper Center*. Le Centre a été honoré lors du
meeting de Juillet pour son travail de préservation et de documentation,
depuis plus de 70 ans, de la revue «voice of the people», ainsi que pour
son engagement à rendre les données disponibles au plus grand nombre. En
juillet, Mark Abrahamson a pris en charge la direction du Centre Roper.
Mark, un sociologue spécialiste des méthodes et de la théorie, fait
parti depuis de nombreuses années du conseil d'administration du
Centre. Il s'est impliqué activement dans des programmes pour accroître
l'utilisation du *Roper Center* au sein du Campus de l'Université du
Connecticut, pour répondre à des offres de projets et dans les
initiatives Data-PASS et CIDE. (Contribution de Lois Timms-Ferrara)

A l'université de Wisconsin-Madison, le *Data and Program Library
Service (DPLS)* a fusionné avec les services de données du *Center for
Demography and Ecology et du Center for Demography of Health and Aging
(CDHA)*. L'unité ainsi créée se nomme *Data and Information Services
Center ([DISC](http://www.disc.wisc.edu/))*. Tous les services
disponibles avant ce regroupement se poursuivront : référencement,
enseignement, archivage des données et accès aux sources de données en
sciences sociales. (Contribution de Cindy Severt)

Gretchen Gano (bibliothécaire spécialisé en données administratives et
gouvernementales à l'Université de New York) et Julie Linden
(bibliothécaire spécialisée en données gouvernementales à l'Université
de Yale) ont entrepris un avant-projet pour analyser et documenter les
défis et problèmes majeurs de l'accès à long terme des données
relatives à l'information gouvernementale. Leur projet portera plus
particulièrement sur les données numériques. Vous trouverez des détails
sur ce projet, ainsi qu'une ébauche de la procédure de migration des
données à partir de CD et un lien vers la présentation de leur
conférence d'octobre 2006 intitulée 'Federal Depository Library
Conference' (conférence sur les bibliothèques d'Archives fédérales), à
l'adresse suivante :
<http://www.library.yale.edu/govdocs/cdmigration/>. (Contribution de
Julie Linden)

Il y a eu une parution majeure de données historiques de recensement
global et de fichiers de découpage géographique ('boundary files')
(pour les années 1790 à 2000) dans le *National Historical Geographic
Information System ([NHGIS](http://www.nhgis.org/))* (système
d'information géographique historique national) du *Minnesota
Population Center*. Cette nouvelle parution inclue des informations au
niveau des comtés et des états (1790-2000), au niveau des secteurs de
recensement (1910-2000), une complète couverture géographique pour les
années de 1970 à 2000, et des fichiers de découpage des comtés
(1790-2000) et des secteurs de recensement (1910-2000). Le NHGIS a été
financé par la *National Science Foundation*. (Contribution de Wendy
Thomas)

*Thanks to Marie Chebance for undertaking this translation.*
