+++
nid = "3413"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 1999-2000: Europe"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-1999-2000-europe"
date = "2013-05-19 10:20:04 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Report of the European Regional Secretary

by
Vigdis Kvalheim
Norwegian Social Science Data Services (NSD)
May 2000

This report includes information on some of the activities in the
European region, which involve IASSIST members. In Europe IASSIST has 67
members. Approx. half of them reside in the United Kingdom while the
rest distributes across 16 European countries. Only countries that
responded to the call for information on IASSIST related activities are
included in the report.

In 1999 two new social science data archives started its operation in
Europe, the Finnish Social Science Data Archive (FSD) and the Greek
National Centre for Social Research (EKKE). Both have been accepted as
members of the Council of European Social Science Data Archives
(CESSDA).

 

### International projects

Several IASSIST members are involved in cross-national projects, many of
which are funded by the European Union. *(Projects presented on this
section are not duplicated in the country specific reports).*

**Integrated Library and Survey Data Extraction Service (ILSES)**

The Zentralarchiv für empirische Sozialforschung (ZA) reports that ILSES
in 1998 was successfully completed and the final report approved by EU.
The ILSES Consortium now has an instrument for servicing continuous
comparative studies and related studies via the Internet. Currently
ISLES is operating on a sample of Eurobarometers (studies, codebooks,
data) and related publications. Thus ILSES allows access to data via
metadata retrieval, linkage to literature on variable level, recoding of
data to create comparability and automatic data extraction from
different files to construct an integrated analysis file. The ILSES
Consortium plans to enlarge this database with priority for the
Eurobarometers and to extend web access tools.

**The European Social Survey (ESS)**

The Zentralarchiv für empirische Sozialforschung (ZA) and Norwegian
Social Science Data Services (NSD) report that the European Social
Survey prepared under the auspices of the European Science Foundation is
making good progress. More than 20 countries declared interest to
participate. Several European data archives have been involved in the
planning process. The ESS is being developed on the basis of a joint
funding approach with national research councils covering the national
fieldwork, survey costs and the European Commission the central research
and co-ordination costs. An application will be sent to the EU in late
June. In June the Steering Committee for the survey will decide about
the archiving function of the ESS.

**From NESSTAR TO FASTER**

The Danish Data Archive (DDA) reports that the ongoing NESSTAR project
has been official closed down in January 2000, while a new EC-funded
project started up. The FASTER project, which build on NESSTAR
technology, brings together content management and personalisation
technologies with the requirements for user-friendly statistical
dissemination services. It will create a flexible and intelligent
presentation system to access statistical and other data in a
distributed 'virtual' environment. Based on a Web environment with
client side functionality, and built around the careful specification of
metadata content, it will allow the user to create their own personal
data environment, derive all relevant contextual and supporting
information and hence make the most productive use of expensive data
resources. The main project partners are the United Kingdom Data Archive
(UKDA), the Norwegian Social Science Data Services (NSD), the Danish
Data Archive (DDA), Statistics Netherlands (CBS) and the University of
Milan.

**LIMBER**

The Norwegian Social Science (NSD) reports on LIMBER, a new project
funded by the European Commision under its Information Society
Technologies Programme. The project seeks to address the problems of
linguistic and discipline boundaries, which, within a more integrated
European environment, is becoming increasingly important. LIMBER will
move towards providing metadata in a common format, taking the DDI
codebook standard into the RDF framework. This will allow metadata from
other domains to be integrated with the social science metadata. LIMBER
will use multi-lingual thesaurus and interfaces to allow the user to
search in their own natural language, with help in refining searches
from the thesaurus. The relevance of any dataset will be determined from
translations of the keywords assigned. This means that various areas of
the DDI codebook XML will have to be assigned controlled vocabulary,
which is a highly resource intense operation. Another deliverable from
the LIMBER project, will therefore be an automatic indexing tool.

The main project partners are CLRC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,UK,
Intrasoft, GR, the United Kingdom Data Archive (UKDA), and Norwegian
Social Science Data Services (NSD).

**PARTCOM-MULTILEVEL - Democratic participation and political
communication in systems of multi-level governance**

The Norwegian Social Science Data Services (NSD) reports on
PARTCOM-MULTILEVEL, a new project funded by the European Commission
under its Research Programme. The project deals with problems of
electoral participation and political communication in systems of
multi-level governance. It employs a threefold strategy (survey
research, aggregate-data analysis and communication research). The
survey and media component of the project, cover all fifteen member
states of the EU. The aggregate data component covers six member states
of the EU (Denmark, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland and Spain)
and three states in the USA (California, Michigan and Texas). The
project consists of five phases: theoretical and methodological
development, data preparation, country and comparative analysis and
preparation of final reports. NSD is responsible for data co-ordination
and integration and carthography. It is anticipated that the project
will lead to substantial improvement in our understanding of the problem
of abstention and to significant policy recommendations.

**European Research Gateway Organization (ERGO)**

The Norwegian Social Science Data Services (NSD) reports on ERGO, a
pilot project organised and funded under the innovation programme of the
Directorate-General XIII of the European Union. The NSD was active in
ERGO as a data supplier and is represented in its Working Group and
Implementation Group.

ERGO seeks to integrate information on research and development in the
European Economic Area (i.e., the European Union, Norway, Iceland and
Liechtenstein) in a joint European database. The pilot project has
delivered its report to the EC in the autumn of 1999, and the Working
Group is hoping for funding under the Fifth Framework for the full ERGO
project. The database is available on Internet:
<http://www.cordis.lu/ergo/>.

[]{#_Toc394570335}[]{#_Toc395017306}[]{#_Toc395084452}[]{#_Toc402080390}

**Health Behaviour Among School-Aged Children (HBSC)**

NSD reports on HBSC, a project funded by the World Health organisation
(WHO). Working on an assignment from HEMIL, the Research Centre for
Health Promotion at the University of Bergen, the NSD has organised data
from a European research project on the lifestyle and health behaviour
of 11, 13 and 15-year-old schoolchildren. This survey, first conducted
in 1983 in Norway, Finland and Austria, was repeated in 1985, 1989, 1993
and 1997/98. In 1997/98, 29 countries participated. The integrated
dataset contains information on 130.000 youths in Europe, North America
and Israel.

The idea behind this WHO funded survey is to provide information on the
lifestyle and health behaviour of young people. An important feature of
the survey is the use of an identical set of 60 core questions in all
countries, enabling social scientists to draw comparisons between
countries and over time.

**MISSION and IQML**

The Centre for Educational Studies in Edinburgh (CES) reports that the
Centre is responsible for two EU funded projects, MISSION (Multi-Agent
Integration Of Shared Statistical Information Over The [Inter]Net)
aims to provide a modular system of software which will enable providers
of official statistics to publish their data in a unified, and unifying,
framework, and to allow consumers of statistics to access these data in
an informed manner with minimum effort.

The partners will utilise the advances in statistical techniques for
data harmonisation, agent technology, and the availability of standards
for exchanging metadata and the power of Internet information retrieval,
tools, to build a modular software suite.

Further details can be found on { HYPERLINK
<http://www.epros.ed.ac.uk/mission>
}[www.epros.ed.ac.uk/mission](http://www.epros.ed.ac.uk/mission) Project
number: IST-1999-10655

IQML (A Software Suite and Extended Mark-Up Language [XML] Standard
for Intelligent Questionnaires) is a project, which aims to use current
and emerging information technologies to implement a solution for
intelligent questionnaires, and to influence international standards for
metadata interchange and database access standards.

 

### News from individual countries

### Denmark

**Danish Data Archive, DDA - 1999-2000**

Where 1998 was a year of reorganisation in which 26 people where
involved in producing 12,4 full time equivalents, the year 1999 was a
year of growth and learning in the DDA. In 1999 20 people produced 18,4
full time equivalents. This is the largest production DDA has had in the
19 years for which we have figures. The average for the period is 12.4
full time equivalents. All indications are that the growth will continue
in the year 2000.

The DDA has paid special attention to the following projects in the last
year:

**ERAS (The Unit for Registration and Archiving of Health Data)**

ERAS was established in 1996 by a funding from the Danish Research
Council. The project period is running to the end of 2004. ERAS offers
Danish medical researcher in the health area a safe and optimal
preservation and processing of their studies. The documentation is
standardised in the OSIRIS format. A major part of the health data
consist of highly personal sensitive data, and the physically storing,
exchange and distribution of data are therefore subjected to the
regulation of the Data Surveillance Authority in Denmark.

**Administrative data from the public sector**

The Danish Data Archive is a part of the State Archives in Denmark,
which also include the National Archives. This offers the opportunity to
acquire the huge and growing amount of administrative data from the
public sector in Denmark. A close co-operation between the DDA and the
National Archives has been established regarding this particular area to
ensure that valuable data and studies are collected and stored for the
Social Science Research Community.

**DIP - Demographic Internet Publication**

A major and growing type of data in DDA are the historical census data.
In continuation of this DDA - together with UKDA, NSD, NIWI (Steinmetz),
Norwegian Historical Data Centre and Demographic Research Centre
(Denmark) - submitted an EC-project application for the fifth Framework
Programme. The project - DIP will create a system that makes the great
amount of historical census records in Europe easily available for the
researchers and the general public. It will do so by building a web
based environment that allows the general public to search for
individuals and to find related cases. For the researcher the
environment will provide statistical tools that make it possible to make
several kinds of demographic analysis. In order to achieve these goals
the project will develop metadata standards for describing census
records and will use and extend the on-going work of international
co-operations as HISCO when deciding on standardisation and coding. This
is necessary in order to make international use of the data and in order
to build the client. DIP will thus take the lead in providing standards
and methods for using this important historical material.

Regardless of the outcome of the outcome of the EU-application the
Source Entry Project continues it collection of demographic data. The
holdings are rapidly approaching three million person records. The
dissemination from these holdings exceeds 100.000 data sets per month.

### Finland

**The Finnish Social Science Data Archive (FSD)** started to operate in
the beginning of 1999 as a separate unit within the University of
Tampere. It is a national resource centre for social science research
and teaching and its main task is to increase the use of existing data
in the social sciences by disseminating it throughout Finland and also
internationally.

Overall FSD provides a wide range of services from data archiving to
information services. FSD is currently involved in many national and
international projects. In 1999, the unit participated in organising the
funding for the European Social Survey and in the year 2000 FSD takes
part in the launching of Finnish participation in the ISSP
(International Social Survey Programme).

FSD has started a nation-wide project to develop Internet resources for
each discipline in social sciences, and is offering datasets for
classroom use. In addition to FSD, Finland has many other IASSIST
related information society projects ongoing. Among these are the
Finnish Virtual Library Project that is developing internet services for
the use of the Finnish academic and higher education community and the
Finnish Virtual University project by the Ministry of Education. FSD
promotes all IASSIST related actions in Finland very actively.

### Germany

**Zentralarchiv fur empirische Socialforschung (ZA)**

**ZA- EUROLAB**

ZA received funding from EU to continue its Large Scale Facility
activities. For this purpose visits of European scholars can be funded.
ZA has created ZA- EUROLAB as access point to the ZA services. In this
European data laboratory for comparative research as well assisted
access to comparative European survey data is supported with funding
under the Impact on Human Potential - Access to Research Infrastructures
Programme within the 5 Framework programme of EU.

**ECCR**

The European Consortium for Communication Research (ECCR) was founded on
March 30, 2000 in Brussels. It aims at improving data and information
flow within media and communication research as well as with the media
organisations, as well as improving training and research opportunities
for young researchers. Jan Servaes (Brussels) is president, Ekkehard
Mochmann is board member.

### GREECE

**Project MITOS**

The first phase of project MITOS was completed in 1999. It was
implemented on behalf of **EKKE (National Center for Social Research)**
and treats a special Data Bank with aim the creation of a reliable data
archive for social facts and numbers.

This archive is based upon the needs of public Organisations and
companies and will provide datasets and information in order to trace
policy in the social domain. Τhe datasets that are included in the
archive come from research work that EKKE has available as well as other
sources. The process of collecting data (that is interviews,
questionnaires etc) is a procedure that has to be done from a lot of
organisations collecting data according to their mission. In the future,
the datasets will be collected on a regular basis, and **"MITOS"**
will operate as an Inventory Center.

**ITCC S.A.** undertook the project of this special Data Bank in
co-operation of ITCC S.A. expert consultants who ensured the quality and
the fulfilment regarding the entire project. The collection and the
organisation records (Resource and Consumer facts) are accomplished with
the support of EKKE and centre's working team. The systematic use of
International Models and the insuring of the materialising of a modern
repository / inventory is been accomplished by the executives of ITCC
S.A.

The success of the special Data Bank depends on the skills and long
experience of ITCC S.A.: providing total and integrated solutions on the
inventory that is referring to the recording of resources of social
datasets, and the institutional frame and the economic and technical
function specified for the Center. The software and hardware system will
connect the SPECIAL DATA BANK with other Systems of EKKE, as well as the
outside society. The existence of **MITOS** will allow relative studies
and analysis of facts that until today were impossible in Greece.

Further information is available from ITCC SA, email
<ktenidis@itccnet.gr>

### The Netherlands

Since two years the Steinmetz Archive together with the Netherlands
Historical Data Archive are part of NIWI; the Netherlands Institute for
Scientific Information Services. Although it took some effort, the data
archives are discovering the benefits of being part of a larger
organisation. The other parts of NIWI give a range of opportunities to
work together, get feedback and to look over the horizon of data
archiving.

The NIWI data archives try to keep up with the international
developments and are involved in European projects like ILSES, DIP and
LIMBER. Also is NIWI involved in the European Value Study (EVS) project
and on the national level the Dutch National Accounts project and the
Census project.

Since last year the NIWI data archives started working together more
closely with the Dutch Statistical Agency. It resulted in the
appointment of Ron Dekker who is head of the Agency, as parttime head of
the archives after Harry Heemskerk left. This relationship with the
Statistical Agency has led to a more active role for the data archives
mainly in large data projects where the expertise of a data archive can
be used very well.

Another development is the plan to use data clusters, mainly to provide
an easy search tool, another reason is that we might be able to find
funding for particular clusters.

### Norway

The last two years have been busy for the **Norwegian Social Science
Data Services (NSD).** The involvement in new projects, in particular
European projects funded by the EU, has resulted in a steady growth in
the number of tasks and staff members.

At the moment NSD employ 64 persons, of which 20 are students working on
a half time basis.

In recent years, the NSD has increasingly been involved in international
projects e.g. the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), Health
Behaviour Among School-Aged Children (HBSC), NESSTAR, FASTER, LIMBER,
ERGO *(see international projects)*. Also, NSD has taken an initiative
to establish a formal Norwegian Eurobarometer affiliation through the
European Free Trade Association or the European Economic Area. In 1999,
the Norway received the go ahead from the EC, and funding was secured
through the Research Council of Norway. From 1999 NSD will conduct the
Norwegian edition of the Eurobarometer survey "the Norwegian Europe
Survey" on a yearly basis. The international co-operation in which the
NSD is involved is vital to the quality of the data services we offer
our national users.

More at home, some of the more important achievements are the signing of
a new agreement between statistics Norway and NSD on the dissemination
of data from Statistics Norway to the research community and the work to
improve access to data from the many national health registers.

**The agreement with Statistics Norway**

Statistics Norway has long been relying on NSD as a data broker to the
research community. In 1976 the first collaborative was signed, securing
Norwegian research workers and students free access to the greater part
of Statistics Norway's data on the municipal level and to data from most
of the agency's interview surveys.

A new agreement signed in 1999 represents an important step forward in
that it explicitly states that individual data (linked and de-identified
data) can be transferred to NSD on a regular basis to be processed and
disseminated to the academic community as anonymous data. In practice
this means that Statistics Norway transfer to NSD some of its
responsibility and by extension, costs involved in the often
time-consuming task of retrieving, organising, anonymising and
disseminating complex microdata.

For the academic community the agreement between NSD and Statistics
Norway, is unquestionably the single most important factor facilitating
social empirical social research in Norway. By using NSD as a gateway to
resources, procedures have been established that allow for external
access to microdata (including very sensitive linked micro-data) in such
a way that the identification of units is prevented, ensure the
continuity of data deliveries and ensure easy and equal (free) access to
data.

**Access to data in National Health Registers**

The most interesting development in Norway these days is the fact that
the model which started out as a solution to social science need for
data, gradually is adopted by other sectors, e.g. the medical and health
sciences.

During the last twenty years there have been several efforts within to
medical sector to improve access to national health registers. In 1997 a
working group appointed by the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
proposed to improve access to health registers by relying on
co-operation between Statistics Norway and NSD. The working group
consisting of representatives from the Ministry and relevant external
actors. It was mandated to look at co-ordinating functions and to
propose institutional and technical measures that would improve access
for both administrative bodies and the research community while
protecting confidentiality. NSDs director, Bjorn Henrichsen, led the
working group, and the secretariat was located at NSD and the Ministry
of Health and Social Affairs.

The model proposed is based on collaboration between the health
registers, Statistics Norway, NSD. The main structural element of the
model is the principle of person-specific encrypting of data. In
practice this means that Statistics Norway 1) receives personal data
from the health registers, 2) encrypts date of birth and national ID
suffix to a pseudonym, 3) creates links as appropriate, and 4) transfers
the data to NSD. This principle gives a high degree of flexibility in
servicing specific user needs with a minimum loss of information while
at the same time ensuring maximum data protection.

In 1998 the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs proposed a new law on
electronic processing of information contained in national health
registers and medical records. One of the intentions behind the new
legislation is to create a common legislative framework for all these
registers in order to improve access for external users. The proposed
legislation supports the model for access proposed by the working group
i.e. based on co-operation between Statistics Norway and NSD. The text
states that data legally can be transferred to two different archive
institutions, one with the responsibility of merging data from different
sources and one primarily servicing user needs.

The proposed law text explicitly protects the right of access to
information for planning and research purposes. In other word, it
establishes unambiguously that research is a legitimate activity. From
the point of view of the research community this is very important
bearing in mind that the key barrier to access as of today is the fact
that the data holders (registers) seem to believe that they own the data
they are managing on behalf of the society. The registers seems to have
developed their own interpretations of regulations, and formulated their
own access policy and practice referring to the privacy legislation and
other existing legal framework. Consequently access is limited and
diverse.

### The United Kingdom

**The United Kingdom Data Archive (UKDA)**

Kevin Schurer is the new director of UKDA, University of Essex.

**Qualidata**

Louise Corti, Deputy Director, reports that Qualidata is now regarded as
one of the international centres of expertise for archiving qualitative
data on a national scale, and offers a pioneering model. Since October
1996, the Centre has established international contacts through meetings
and correspondence with archivists and researchers in Europe, North
America and Asia. Not only has the Centre been actively consulted by a
number of archival initiatives across the world, but has organised a
stream devoted to the archiving and re-use of qualitative data at the
forthcoming International Social Science Methodology Conference in
Cologne in October 2000. 15 countries have submitted papers to
Qualidata's sessions, including 4 speakers from national Data Archives
who are planning the acquisition of Qualidata data. This looks like an
exciting conference and there we hope to establish a new European
(international) network of qualitative data archives.

**Update on data: the preservation of Professor George Brown's life's
collection of research data**

In March 1999, Qualidata secured a grant from George Brown, via the
Medical Research Council (MRC), to undertake the preparation, scanning,
documentation and archiving of data and documentation from his life's
research work. The research, comprising a very large resource of both
qualitative and quantitative materials, dates back to the 1960s and is
considered, internationally, to be among the most pioneering work on
socio-economic aspects of mental health and the social aetiology of
depression. It has already been in regular use for many years, both for
ongoing research and for teaching purposes. This is a mammoth exercise
in scanning, document conversion and indexing, which will enable both
quantitative and qualitative data from around 7 studies to be available.

**User wishes for qualitative data resources**

In January 2000 Qualidata conducted a major national survey of potential
users of archived qualitative data. Researchers and teachers were asked
to say what kinds of qualitative data archives might be most useful to
them. Over 550 responses were received from a range of user communities,
of which 99% wanted to see datasets, mostly in electronic form,
available for both research and teaching, across a wide range of
disciplines. Health and criminology came out on top. The incentive of
winning Amazon vouchers greatly boosted our response rate!

**Funding situation and some longer terms aims**

The 5 years Resource Centre award for Qualidata ends in September 2000,
and the centre have been offered the opportunity to bid for a much
smaller amount. ESRC are currently unsure about their level of
commitment to archiving social science data in their various shapes and
forms, and are commissioning a consultancy to see what their priorities
and long term strategy should look like. Qualidata is therefore in the
position of having to seek financial sources from funders other than
their current one (ESRC). This is a worrying time for an archival
enterprises in the social sciences, like Qualidata. Qualidata has served
not only as a test bed for the archiving of qualitative research on a
national scale (for which the mission has proved possible!) but also as
a centre of advice for other budding projects across the world working
in this field. They have great plans, including the creation of
significant electronic data resources, and hope to be able to realise
these in addition to keeping the basic machine going.

In the mean time the centre is discussing a longer-term strategy for a
more integrated working relationship, and potential union with the UK
Data Archive. Most immediately this is in terms of joint support for
ESRC researchers and a redesigning of our on-line catalogue in an
advanced joint form suitable to meet the needs of resource discovery in
the 21st Century. While many of the particular problems of
confidentiality etc remain particular to qualitative datasets and
therefore need typically handling in different ways, the earlier
distinction between paper-based qualitative research and
machine-readable survey material no longer applies for current most
research data. In this sense, a closer integration is practicable,
points to efficiency gains, and would be equally welcomed by the Data
Archive.

In the next report to IASSIST, Qualidata hopes to be able to report
success in attaining funding for the coming year and on how the national
Data Archives are coping with qualitative data!

**The Edinburgh University Data Library**

The Edinburgh University Data Library
([http://datalib.ed.ac.uk](http://datalib.ed.ac.uk/)) has been
re-consolidating its local data services to the university in 1999-2000,
while settling into its fifth year of providing national services for
bibliographic and research datasets to UK Higher Education as EDINA
([http://edina.ed.ac.uk](http://edina.ed.ac.uk/)).

There were significant staff changes. Donald Morse left the Data Library
last Fall, but not Edinburgh University Computing Services, where he now
manages the university's Call Management System. Robin Rice took a more
permanent position as Data Librarian in October '99 after serving a
one-year secondment from the Data and Program Library Service at the
University of Wisconsin. Since January '99 Stuart

Macdonald, as Library Assistant, has been helping local users register
and access datasets and writing web-based documentation. Peter Burnhill
and Alison Bayley still lead the local and national services as Director
and Deputy Director, with a staff of 30 people.

The visibility and usage of local data services increased dramatically
this year with new datasets and heavy promotion through several
methods-paper handouts, a revamped website, a current awareness email
list, monthly newsletter articles, and departmental and classroom
presentations.

EDINA saw the success of its pilot Digimap project lead to a 5-year
national contract to provide downloadable Ordnance Survey map data along
with a service allowing users to view and print customised maps of Great
Britain via the WWW.

In both its local and national roles, the Data Library is leading a
JISC-funded project to examine problems and solutions in supporting the
Use of Numeric Data in Learning and Teaching, with broad participation
from national datacentres, local support staff, and academic data users.
