+++
nid = "1080"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2008-2009: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2008-2009-united-states"
date = "2010-11-26 06:06:23 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2008-2009
United States
Pam Baxter
Cornell University
May 2009

Inauguration of a new administration brings substantial changes in the
executive branch. As preparation for the decennial Census intensifies,
there's been scrutiny of the President's choice(s) for Commerce
Secretary as well as his Census Bureau nominee, Robert Groves. Both
Secretary Gary Locke and Groves (director of the Survey Research
Institute, University of Michigan) addressed concerns of some in
Congress; that is, the latter's past support for statistical sampling
in the decennial Census.

In May, the US government launched the site
[Data.gov](http://www.data.gov/) which is intended as a portal to US
government data products. Government agencies were encouraged to
identify "raw" data to be included during the launch. These datasets
would then be presented in a searchable manner and more datasets would
be added as the site developed. During the development phase, IASSIST
members San Cannon (Federal Reserve) and Dan Gillman (BLS) helped
develop the metadata scheme to be used for the datasets listed on
Data.gov and they included input gathered from the IASSIST community.
The site is still a work in progress. Data sets continue to be added
although it is unlikely that the site will reach 240,000 datasets by the
end of June as was (possibly erroneously) reported in the *New York
Times*.

### Developments in IASSIST Members' Institutions

**University of North Carolina's** School of Information and Library
Science hosted the second Digital Curation Curriculum Conference in
April 2009, [DigCCurr 2009: Digital Curation Practice, Promise and
Prospects](http://www.ils.unc.edu/digccurr2009/). It was held as part of
the Preserving Access to Our Digital Future: Building an International
Digital Curation Curriculum (DigCCurr) project. DigCCurr (pronounced
"dij-seeker") is a three-year activity (2006-2009), funded by
Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) involving collaboration
between SILS and the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA). The goals of DigCCurr are to develop a graduate-level curricular
framework, course modules, and experiential components to prepare
students for digital curation in various environments.

This year's symposium attracted over 260 attendees, including 100
presenters from nine countries. The symposium received high marks from
attendees for its wide-ranging program covering digital curation
synergies and collaboration; teaching and training at the international
level; digital curation in relation to archives and museums; current
digital curation practices; pressing digital curation needs; and
infrastructures in support of digital curation. It also provided a venue
for network building among digital curation professionals from a variety
of practice settings. As noted by one attendee, DigCCurr2009 did, "the
best job I have seen yet of pulling together educators, researchers, and
practitioners around these interesting issues." Program, speaker bios,
presentation abstracts, and full Proceedings available on the
DigCCurr2009 conference website. The published
[proceedings](http://stores.lulu.com/DigCCurr2009) can also be
downloaded at no charge.

The School of Information and Library Science, through the recently
funded DigCCurr II project, will host 3 week-long professional
institutes on digital curation. The first, DigCCurr Professional
Institute: Curation Practices for the Digital Object Lifecycle, will
take place June 21-26, 2009. More information on the professional
institutes, as well as [DigCCurr and DigCCurr
II](http://ils.unc.edu/digccurr/index.html), may be found on the project
website.

Also from UNC: The University is now home to the Data Intensive Cyber
Environments (DICE) group (formerly known as Data Intensive Computing
Environments group), previously housed at the University of California -
San Diego's Supercomputer Center. The DICE team was awarded the [SAA
Jameson Archival Advocacy
Award](http://www.archivists.org/recognition/sanfrancisco2008-awards.asp#jameson)
in August 2008.

The research team will hold appointments in UNC's School of Information
and Library Science with research space in Chapel Hills Renaissance
Computing Institute (RENCI). The research group brings expertise in
development of digital data technologies, including open source software
to share data in collaborative research, publication of data in digital
libraries, and preservation of data in persistent archives. For more
information, see the [August 26, 2008 UNC press
release](http://uncnews.unc.edu/news/campus-and-community/carolina-attracts-world-renowned-large-scale-data-research-team-dice.html).
[Submitted by Michele Hayslett]




**ICPSR** launched its new [Online Learning
Center](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/olc) (OLC) in September, 2008. The
OLC is a source of empirical activities aimed at undergraduates in
lower-division, substantive courses. Its goal is to assist faculty in
building students' quantitative literacy skills across the curriculum.
Activities in the OLC match social science concepts to data within
ICPSR's holdings, making it easier for instructors to use real data in
introductory-level classes. Use of the OLC should increase quantitative
literacy among students, pique their interest in the social sciences,
and bridge the gap between substantive and required methodological
courses by making the need for, and process of, social science research
more apparent. In addition to IASSIST, presentations about the Online
Learning Center have been made at regional and national sociology
conferences and on various college campuses. [Contributed by Lynette
Hoelter]
