+++
nid = "1768"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2007-2008: Canada"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2007-2008-canada"
date = "2011-05-13 08:47:29 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2007-2008
Canada
Bo Wandschneider
University of Guelph
May 16, 2008

As per usual it is a challenge to try and capture what is happening from
such a broad and engaged community. I can only imagine the challenge for
the other regional secretaries. I thank all those who submitted content
and I apologize if I missed something. These are in no specific order.

### Research Data Network (RDC)

The Canadian Research Data Centre Network's infrastructure project has
begun with a test-bed implementation of an articulated private virtual
network running on a dedicated lightpath on Canada's national
high-speed research network (managed by
[CANARIE](http://www.canarie.ca/) - Canada's advanced Internet
development organization). Beginning in the fall of 2008, this intranet
will be expanded to incorporate the rest of the RDC Network, which now
consists of 15 RDCs and nine branches across the country. In addition,
Sonia Latour has been hired as the Metadata Project Manager. Sonia is on
secondment from Statistics Canada where she has over 20 years of
experience in Census operations. An RFP for software tools development
to support DDI 3.0 metadata production will be announced sometime in
June 2008. This RFP includes tools to help with the conversion of
metadata from earlier versions of DDI to DDI 3.0 and tools to help
researchers produce DDI-compliant metadata of working data files, that
is, the data files researchers produce in RDCs while conducting their
analyses. A second RFP will be announced in early 2009 for the
development of tools to analyze DDI metadata for comparative purposes.

### Ontario Data Extraction System and Infrastructure

Just one year ago, the project, building a data portal designed to
facilitate data exploration and extraction, received funding from the
Ontario Council of University Libraries ([OCUL](http://www.ocul.on.ca/))
and broader Public Sector (BPS) Supply Chain Secretariat, Ontario
Ministry of Finance
([OntarioBuys](http://www.fin.gov.on.ca/english/ontariobuys/)). Since
then, much has been accomplished: Paula Hurtibise, the project manager
was hired, co-op students have marked-up over 400 datasets including
demographic data from Statistics Canada and polling data from Gallup and
on May 4, 2008 [](http://odesi.ca/) was launched on the highly
successful [Scholars Portal website](http://scholarsportal.info/).

Key to the success of is the DDI, Best Practices Document (BPD) created
by the project team. The BPD is widely used by Canadian institutions for
marking-up files in DDI format and is available through
[odesi.ca](http://odesi.ca/) in both French and English.

### [ACCOLEDS](http://datalib.library.ualberta.ca/accoleds/)

The western Canadian library data services group (ACCOLEDS) is
undertaking a pilot project with the editors of a couple of open access
journals to mark-up statistical tables. The objective is to mark-up
content about tables that will allow better searching for statistical
information in these tables and that will enable linking between tables
and the data sources from which they were derived. Maxine Tedesco (an
IASSIST member from the University of Lethbridge) will be spearheading
this pilot while on study leave in 2008.

### National Initiatives

Two new significant national policies have been announced in Canada
since the last IASSIST conference. First, Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) announced in the fall of 2007 its new open access policy
regarding research outputs (<http://www.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/32005.html>).
While the emphasis of the new policy is primarily on creating access to
research findings, it does require the deposit of bioinformatics,
atomic, and molecular coordinate data with appropriate data
repositories. In these cases, international repositories already exist.
As trusted data repositories relevant to health data are developed in
Canada, there will be a movement to expand the policy's coverage to
include the deposit of more data produced under CIHR funding.

Second, Library and Archives Canada concluded at the end of 2007 a
public consultation to develop a Canadian Digital Information Strategy.
This process resulted in a document detailing the principles and
activities needed in Canada to produce, preserve and provide access to
digital content arising in the heritage, scientific and government
sectors
(<http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/cdis/012033-1000.01-e.html>).
Research data are clearly identified in this strategy document as
valuable digital resources that Canadians need to preserve and to
provide access.

In a related national activity, the Canada Institute for Scientific and
Technical Information (CISTI), which is Canada's national science
library, is sponsoring a new working group, known as Research Data
Canada, to address issues raised in the Consultation on Access to
Scientific Research Data, which have remained untouched for the most
part of the past two years. This new working group represents several
Canadian organizations, including universities, federal granting
agencies, institutes, libraries and individual researchers. They will
focus on the necessary actions and leadership roles that researchers and
institutions must take to ensure Canada's research data are accessible
and usable for current and future generations of researchers.

### CARL (Canadian Association of Research Libraries

CARL formed a new Data management Working Group after a 2007 survey they
conducted revealed that most of their member libraries are interested in
holding researcher-generated data, but few have a formal data
preservation policy. This working group consists of five directors from
member libraries.
(<http://www.carl-abrc.ca/about/working_groups/data_mgt_mandate-e.html>)

### CANDDI

Discussions in CANDDI tapered off with the emergence of the DLI DDI and
projects. While the CANDDI template helped facilitate discussion around
the best practices document that was subsequently developed in
conjunction with , all other activity pretty much disappeared in CANDDI.
Recent interest, however, has surfaced to revitalize CANDDI to address
some of the other issues for which it was originally organized,
including shared variable group names and control vocabulary.

### PUMF's

In Canada, there have been some positive developments in addition to
some continuing concerns. The group working on the 2006 Census PUMFs has
come up with a compromise that would see two files developed. The first
would be an individual file (2% sample); the second would be
hierarchical in nature (1% sample). This represents a move from the
original position which would have eliminated the individual file. The
committee is to be commended for it extensive consultation and
creativity in the face of competing demands.

The Canadian Household Panel Survey has been working on producing a
longitudinal, synthetic file that would allow users to create models
that mimic the actual confidential data without risk of disclosure.
While not PUMFs, these will be public and available for preliminary
research. Both the above innovations have been driven by international
demand.

On the other hand, there is a committee studying the future of PUMFs.
The fact that the value of PUMFs greatly outweighs their cost may not be
fully appreciated. With 74 post-secondary institutions and projects such
as serving to make PUMFs ever-more accessible, the cost of using these
files is approaching zero. Curtailing the production of PUMFs would
result in the same sort of situation we were in pre-DLI.

### OCUL (Ontario Council of University Libraries) Map Group

The OCUL map group is developing a proposal to create a Geospatial Data
Portal. It is the vision of the proposal to establish a shared
infrastructure, operated as part of OCUL's Scholars Portal services for
storing and delivering geospatial data to students, faculty, staff, and
researchers affiliated with Ontario's 19 universities. This
infrastructure will enable the development of a shared interface for
search, discovery and access to geospatial data and new models for
acquiring and licensing geospatial data through consortium purchasing.

### DLI

DLI continues to work on making Public Use Microdata File's (PUMF)
documentation available on the DLI site at Statistics Canada. They
provide access to this metadata using NESSTAR. DLI is also working
closely with Statistics Canada's subject-matter divisions in order to
eventually have DDI compliant files exported directly from the Survey
production line to tools like NESSTAR. There is also work being done in
going from IMDB which is the standard used in Statistics Canada for
metadata to DDI and from DDI to IMDB. This will facilitate greatly the
exchange of information from one standard to the other. In addition DLI
membership at the college level is beginning to grow.

In addition, DLI has budgeted for two R&D projects focusing on making
metadata more compatible. The first is to develop a two-way crosswalk
between the DDI and the IMDB. The second is to investigate the
feasibility of creating a wizard to take Beyond 20/20 files and mark
them up as DDI-compliant cubes. That would mean that we could augment
the metadata and move the B20/20 files out of their proprietary format
and into a preservable mode.

We are now creating data about data. :-) The second survey on the
Statistics Canada DLI program has been conducted in March-April 2008.
The participation of the Canadian data librarians has been fantastic.
Final response rate: Overall 82% (97/118) DLI contacts 92% (66/72)
Designates 67% (31/46). Gaetan Drolet and folks are now cleaning the
data to produce a SPSS file. The data will be analysed this summer by
Wendy Watkins and Gaetan Drolet. They plan to split the data by DLI
regions for the DLI training coordinators. They will present a report
about the training information collected to the DLI training committee
in September 2008 and a report to the EAC for future planning of the DLI
program. They also plan to disseminate the data to the DLI community
later in a DDI format with NESSTAR and possibly make presentations to
DLI workshops and eventually IASSIST.

### Public Opinion Data in Canada

In the last report we mentioned the use of NESSTAR for the Canadian
Opinion Research Archive ([CORA](http://www.queensu.ca/cora/)) at
Queen's University. Queen's has added approximately 100 files to their
Data Centre's Nesstar service, and are continuing to support the
Nesstar server for the CORA. The CORA data is available to public by
request. In addition they have been soliciting data files from their
researchers and are currently negotiating access to the "International
surveillance and privacy opinion research" survey from their Department
of Sociology at Queen's.

During the year the Laurier Institute for the Study of Public Opinion
and Policy ([LISPOP](http://www.wlu.ca/lispop/)) received a generous
donation from IPSOS- Reid. This includes many public opinion surveys,
election surveys and other types of surveys. LISPOP is working closely
with ODESI to mark-up this rich collection, with a target of making this
publicly available.

Discussions are beginning with to explore other sources of opinion poll
data housed at partner insititutions.

### People news

Anastassia Khouri, who worked to create comprehensive digital
data-government-info-maps support services at McGill has announced that
she will retire at the end of April. In 1996-1997 she began the process
of designing EDRS (Electronic Data Resources Service) within the mandate
of the McGill Libraries. In 2003, Anastassia was given the mandate to
coordinate the Hitschfeld Geographic Information Centre, the Government
Documents Division along with EDRS to form the Government Information,
Maps and Data Centre. We wish Anastasia well in her retirement.

In 2006, Suzette Giles received the Ontario Confederation of University
Faculty Associations (OCUFA) award for Academic Librarianship. Suzette
was recognized for her many contributions in the field of data, map, and
GIS librarianship. Congratulations Suzette.

In 2007, the Council of Prairie and Pacific University Libraries
(COPPUL) presented Chuck Humphrey with their Outstanding Contribution
Award. Chuck was specifically recognized for all his contributions
related to ACCOLEDS, the COPPUL data group -- congratulations Chuck.

That's all for this year.
