+++
nid = "1704"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 1996-1997: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-1996-1997-united-states"
date = "2011-04-19 09:10:50 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Report of the U.S. Regional Secretary
by
Laura Guy
Data and Program Library Service
University of Wisconsin, Madison
May 1997

Please note: this page contains responses received directly from the
IASSIST 1997 U.S. Members Activity Form! Aren't we an interesting group
of people?!!??

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Robin Rice

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Special Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Data and Program Library Service, UW

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   608-262-7962

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   608-262-9711

**Contact_Email:** 
:   rice@dpls.dacc.wisc.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://dpls.dacc.wisc.edu

### Activities

I am the local contact for the Madison chapter of Computer Professionals
for Responsibility. Last November, I attended the Library Research
Seminar I at Florida State University and presented a paper entitled
"Data Sources for Library and Information Science Research".

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Laura Guy

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Senior Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Data and Program Library Service

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   608.262.0750

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   guy@dpls.dacc.wisc.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://dpls.dacc.wisc.edu

### Activities

I was appointed to the campus-wide Windows/NT Architecture Group where
policy is currently being developed to facilitate the administration of
M.S. Windows domains on the Madison campus. Issues have included naming
standards and resource provision. I am also a member of the campus-wide
Tech-Partners Steering Commitee which is responsible for setting policy
for a very large group of campus technology experts. I recently put
together a series of talks on copyright-related issues where experts
from the legal and library fields focused on web publishing, and have
been working on a virtual presentation of web/database connectivity
systems. I've spent much of the last year working on migrating the data
library from UNIX to WinNT, and have taken a number of courses on WinNT
administration. At DPLS one of our main projects is conversion of our
archival data to on-line access via our web site. We've pretty much
been setting our own standards in the how we provide access, and its
been going well enough that we are receiving unsolicited archival
donations --the first time in years. We are certainly very proud of our
work. In addition, I continue to write reviews for the Journal of
Government Information, most recently on the OECD Statistical Compendium
and the U.C. Davis Import Data on CD-ROM. All this at 80%! In March,
1997 the DPLS requested and received an addtional 20% FTE, which
considering these days of constant fiscal crisis is a miracle. I will
thus go back to 100% in July and Staff Librarian Robin Rice will
permanently increase from 50% to 70%.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Patrick Yott

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Social Sciences Data Services Coordinator

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   University of Virginia

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   804 982-2630

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   804924-1431

**Contact_Email:** 
:   pmy2n@virginia.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   www.lib.virginia.edu/socsci

### Activities

1. Taught (with Paul Bergen - Harvard) 3 day ARL workshop "Electronic
Publishing of Datasets on the WWW. October 1996 - Charlottesville (UVA)
March, 1997 - Cambridge (Harvard)

2. Presented paper "Interactive Data Service in Academic Libraries" to
the CNI Task Force meeting (March, 1996)

3. Will present a workshop "User Needs: Service Models for Data
Libraries" at the ACRL annual Conference (April, 1997)

4. Began work on building WWW interface for the ICPSR Consolidated
County and City Data Book files. Will yield merged interface for all
CCDB data from the 1940's through the 1992 edition.

Laura,

Can you change any reference to the Social Sciences Data Center and
Geographic Information Systems Lab to just the Social Sciences Data
Center. We are two separate beasties.

Thanks,

Patrick Yott SSDC UVA

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Jean Stratford

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Director of Research Services

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Inst. of Govt. Affairs, UC Davis

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   916-752-5141

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   916-752-2835

**Contact_Email:** 
:   jsstratford@ucdavis.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   polar.ucdavis.edu/igahome.html

### Activities

This past year I have been involved in a number of social science data
related projects. I served on an internal planning committee for
computing issues within our College of Letters and Science. Our long
term project on U.S. foreign trade data reached a milestone with the
release of 22 years of import data as a CD-ROM product. I have also
worked in an advisory capacity to a group of scholars producing an
electronic version of the standard reference work Historical Statistics
of the United States. The electronic version of the 1976 edition is now
complete and about to be released by Cambridge University Press. The
group has begun work on an updated "millenial" edition. I also
consulted with the Stanford University Libraries on an historical
project that they have under consideration.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   APDU 1996 Conference

### Activities

APDU 96 Conference:

The APDU session on "International Data Availability and Access: Today
and Tomorrow" was an all IASSIST event with moderator Ann S. Gray and
panelist Ernie W. Boyko, Karsten B. Rasmussen, William J. Bradley,
Bridget Winstantley, and Margaret O. Adams.

Ann G. Green joined with Pat Doyle for the session on The Data
Documentation Initiative: Building an International Standard moderated
by Karsten B. Rasmussen.

Wendy Treadwell, also the chair of the conference planning committee,
chaired the session on DADS: Envisiong Future Data Access and Judith
Rowe was a panelist discussing What the Future Holds for the
Dissemination of Federal Statistics.

Wendy Treadwell was elected Vice-President of APDU.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Ann S. Gray

**Contact_Title:** 

:   

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   CISER, Cornell University

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 

:   

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   ann@perseus.ciser.cornell.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.ciser.cornell.edu/archive/Welcome.html

### Activities

Ann Gray was the APDU representative to the COPAFS sponsored Seminar on
Statistical Methodology in the Public Service, A Conference Dedicated to
the Memory of Maria Gonzalez. Ann was a discussant on the proposed web
site: One-Stop Shopping for Federal Statistics.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Sue A. Dodd

### Activities

Sue A. Dodd retired from UNC on Feb. 1, 1997. Her contributions to
standards for information about numeric data (aka metadata) have proved
to be of great value in many applications and developments. This work
was begun almost twenty years ago at the 1978 Conference on Cataloging
and Information Services for Machine-Readable Data Files held at Airlie
House, Warrenton, Virginia -- a conference attended by many of the
original founders of IASSIST.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Annette Watters

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Assistant Director

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Center for Business and Economic Research, University of Alabama

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   205.348.6191

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   awwaters@ua1vm.ua.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.cba.ua.edu/~cba/xfaw.html

### Activities

I am this year's Vice-Chair of the State Data Center Steering
Committee. Our major concerns throughout the year have been census data
access and dissemination (particularly the Census Bureau's proposed
DADS system, an Internet-based system that will replace most printed
products), and planning for the 2000 census. As data users we are
concerned for an accurate census, but also that the resulting data will
be robust and timely. It's a challenge. Sometimes the Census Bureau
does not seem as concerned about data users as we would prefer, and
sometimes Congress seems not to care at all. Other times I am convinced
that if we all work together, everything will work out for the best.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Wendy Brand

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Special Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconin - Madison

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   608.263.6372

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   Brand@ssc.wisc.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/cde/library/home.htm

### Activities

I was elected to the Board of Directors for APLIC-I (The Association for
Population/Family Planning Libraries and Information Centers -
International) at their March 1997 meeting in Washington, DC.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Pat Hildebrand

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Database Administrator

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Social Science Computing, Uinv of PA

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   215 898-3419

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   215 898-7769

**Contact_Email:** 
:   pat@ssc.upenn.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.ssc.upenn.edu/~pat/

### Activities

Professionally, what I have been doing can be described as more of the
same thing as last year. Yes, I have upgraded the version of Oracle that
we are using and the development version of the database has migrated
from Windows for Workgroups to NT 4.0 but I haven't had to deal with
moving the lab from Novell to NT so I really am still learning about NT.
I have even gone from oraperl to DBI/DBD::Oracle but so far I have only
used the Oraperl emulation.

The task force that I am on for a web-warehouse interface officially has
some of my time. We are now live with our queries and Engineering is
using this as well as Arts and Sciences. Given the contents of the
warehouse I can't say take a look if you want to see what I am doing -
sorry.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Ann Green

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Acting Director

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Yale Social Science Statistical Laboratory

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   203-432-3277

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   ann.green@yale.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://statlab.stat.yale.edu

### Activities

Ann Gerken and JoAnn Dionne at Yale University received a grant from the
Commission on Preservation and Access to develop a preservation strategy
for migrating data files and digitizing related paper records. Using
representative sample data files and printed documents from the Yale
Roper Collection, the project is evaluating a variety of data formats
and the related costs, storage sizes, and archival implications of
proprietary and generic options. The second track of the project is
investigating the scanning and storage options for preserving,
accessing, searching, and archiving the printed documents accompanying
the data files. An interim report is available at:
<http://www-cpa.stanford.edu/cpa/misc/preswhol.html> A report will also
be presented at the IASSIST Conference in Odense.

The ICPSR-sponsored Data Documentation Initiative to develop a codebook
DTD in SGML has continued to meet over the past year. A number of
IASSIST members have been active in the committee, chaired by Merrill
Shanks of the University of CA, Berkeley. The DTD alpha version is now
in test mode at ICPSR. Further alpha testing and distribution of the DTD
will be determined in the near future.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   John Blodgett

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Manager, Urban Information Center

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   U. of Missouri St. Louis

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   314.516.6014

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   314.516.6274

**Contact_Email:** 
:   c1921@umslvma.umsl.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.oseda.missouri.edu/uic

### Activities

Busy with writing applications (in SAS and Perl) to permit access to
data on the WWW. 1. Under a contract with CIESIN/SEDAC wrote the
MABLE/Geocorr application:
<http://www.oseda.missouri.edu/plue/geocorr/>. This lets users generate
"correlation lists" showing the relationships between a growing list
of geographic coverages (such as 1980 & 1990 census tracts, 1991 (stf3b)
ZIP codes, PUMA codes, watersheds, etc.) Currently working on possible
extension to merge in land cover data.

2. We developed a little system for letting us create "Contents" files
in our UNIX directories where we could store brief descriptions of all
our files. Then we figured out how to write a Perl program and an HTML
front-end so that we could use these files and a browser to view a lot
of those files via the WWW. All but the SAS datasets, which is where we
kept all the actual data. So then we developed a cgi-bin application
called "uexplore" that let us access a couple of new SAS applications
for doing "proc contents"-like HTML pages for SAS data sets and data
libraries, and another for actually extracting data from those sets (in
.csv, .dbf, proc-print-listing, sas export, or html table formats.) The
whole thing runs against the Missouri State Census Data Center (MSCDC)
census-data-oriented public data archive. There are at least a half
dozen URL's (front ends) to this application, but the best is probably
from the MSCDC Social & Economic Data Library page at:
<http://www.oseda.missouri.edu/infolib/uexplore.html>. The ultimate idea
of this application is that we can have custom applications associated
with specific "filetypes" (subdirectories of our data base) which can
be triggered from dynamically-generated choose-your-application menus.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Kay Worrell

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Research Associate

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   The Conference Board

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   212-339-0480

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   212-980-7014

**Contact_Email:** 
:   worrell@conference-board.org

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://conference-board.org

### Activities

Current responsibilities in compensation research: coordinating a large
annual survey on payment for outside members of corporate boards of
directors; also overseeing data transer from Edgar/SEC database on
compensation of five highest paid executives of 1,000 US corporations.

These data collections result in annual reports with long histories at
The Conference Board, first published in 1939 and 1945, respectively.

Very little on-going professional (personal) activities, except small
presentations to requesting groups (e.g. Women on Board) or companies.

Also co-authored a report on Directors' Retirement Benefits; current
project on diversity on boards of directors (women and minority board
members).

Correction: oversee transfer of data (on top executive compensation)
from Edgar/SEC database to our own data subset! [Didn't mean to imply
that my work is in conjunction with production of the Edgar/Disclosure
database.]

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Cindy Severt

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Data Library Director

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Center for Demography

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   608-262-9827

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   608-262-8400

**Contact_Email:** 
:   severt@ssc.wisc.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   www.ssc.wisc.edu/cde/datalib/

### Activities

I have assumed the duties and title of CDE Data Library Director since
Anne Cooper's retirement in the fall of 1995.

In November 1996 CDE hired Charlie Fiss as an Information Manager who is
working on, among other things, merging the collections of the CDE print
and data libraries using the CUADRA/STAR software with a web interface.
This is a major step in the direction of merging the collections and
operations of both libraries under the umbrella of CDE Information
Services.

I have also been named Special Events Chair of the UW-Madison School of
Library and Information Studies Alumni Association. In this capacity I
have been involved in activities which provide continuity for students
making the transition into the job market, and networking opportunities
for alumni.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Libbie Stephenson

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Data Archivist

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   UCLA, Institute for Social Science Research

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   310-825-0716

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   libbie@ucla.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

The Archive spent most of the year refining techniques for using data
and file management in a UNIX environment. The entire campus now uses
the UNIX operating system and this makes directing users a bit easier.

Martin Pawlocki has developed a FAQ file which we sill soon load into
our web page.

Libbie Stephenson attended a conference on preserving the digital age,
hosted by MCI, Microsoft and the National Science Foundation. The main
focus of the discussion was on the need to preserve materials loaded
onto the Internet. Some interesting statistics emerged. The web itself
is only about 2 terabytes in size, and the average web page dies after
90 days.

The use of the Internet is predicted to change dramatically from a
library/archive of information, to a much more interactive facility,
using what is now called push-pull technology. The other interesting
discussion revolvedaround the need to differentiate between the idea of
saving a file to disk, and actually 'archiving' it. We said that there
needed to be technology available on an owner's machine to enable one
to set up version control, bibliographic elements, and migration-ability
of files. The Microsoft people wrote (well, typed on their laptops)
furiously.

The Archive is also working on a joint project with the Survey Research
Center to scan and store all print versions of questionnaires conducted
by the SRC over the past 20 years. We are reading the files into Adobe
Acrobat and have found that this process is remarkably easy to do and
requires very little editing. We are also indexing each of the
questionnaires so there will be subject oriented as well as key word
searching available.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   jim jacobs

**Contact_Title:** 
:   data services librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   university of california san diego

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   619 534 1262

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   619 534 7548

**Contact_Email:** 
:   jajacobs@ucsd.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://ssdc.ucsd.edu

### Activities

Continued work on "Data on the Net" -- an attempt to keep track of
numeric social science statistical data available on the Internet.
<http://odwin.ucsd.edu/jj/idata>

Plans for a more automated, but still human, version of this are in the
works.

Finished beta version of web access to DRI Basic Economic Data (aka,
"citibase") and International Financial Statistics.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Lisa Neidert

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Senior Research Associate

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Population Studies Center, University of Michigan

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   313.998.7153

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   313.998.7415

**Contact_Email:** 
:   lisan@umich.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.psc.lsa.umich.edu/DA/

### Activities

Helped host a workshop on "Using U.S. Census Data to Study the
Elderly." A similar workshop will be held this summer (July 8-12)
focusing on immigrants. Helped host a workshop on "Taming Large Data"
(February 28-March 1). This involved most of the producers of large
social science longitudinal surveys. I made a presentation on
"Interfaces to Data: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly."

I was a beta tester of the Census Bureau's DADS system. Comments were
sent to the Census Bureau. I hope to continue to have input.

I was nominated to fill out an APDU board position by fellow IASSIST
member, Wendy Treadwell. So far, I'm just watching Wendy.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Sarah E. Cox

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Foreign, International and Comparative Law Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   University of Connecticut School of Law Library

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   860.570.5167

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   scox@holmes.law.uconn.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

This past year I continued to participate in the Conference on Fair Use
sponsored by Commissioner Lehman of the Patent and Trademark Office. An
Interim Report from the Conference has been released with those
guidelines on Fair Use which came out of the Conference. At this point
endorsements for the guidelines are being sought. A final report
including those guidelines which receive sufficent endorsements (however
that is finally defined) will be issued after the final CONFU meeting on
May 19. There are guidelines for the educational fair use of multimedia,
digital visual images, and distance learning. A group of scenarios
illustrating the limits of fair use with respect to software use are
also included. I participated in the development of the distance
learning and the multimedia guidelines.

Besides doing that, on July 1 I was happy to hand over the directorship
of thelaw library to the new director, Darcy Kirk, after I had served as
Acting Director since late October 1994. I spent the summer over-seeing
the move of the library to its beautiful new building across the campus
from the old building. Since then I have done my best to return to my
pedestrian but delightful half-time job as Foreign, International and
Comparative Law Librarian, in which I teachthe foreign LL.M. (Masters of
Law) students how to do reasearch in U.S. law and U.S. J.D. students how
to do research in foreign and international law. The rest of the time, I
rest, think, give talks and write.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Fay Booker

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Data Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   SSPPCC, University of Chicago

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   773.702.8256

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   booke@cicero.spc.uchicago.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.spc.uchicago.edu/DATALIB

### Activities

Other than adding an additional data point to the 2000 Census, I don't
feel like I accomplished much this past year. But here's a quick
summary.

1) WWW Development. We went on the web
(<http://www.spc.uchicago.edu/DATALIB)> about 15 months ago. What's
probably of most interest are our User documents--Intro to Data
Handling (for SAS and SPSS). Soon to be added are "Transferring data
between applications (aka how to get from Excel to SAS in a troublefree
fashion)", "Large Scale Data Management in UNIX", and "Downloading
data from the WEB". We'll also be testing out WWW distribution of
three collections--National Health and Social Life Survey (NHSLS) (PI:
Laumann, Michael and Michaels), Taiwan Women and Family Survey, 1988
(PI: William Parish), and "Nationality and Politics: The Dismemberment
of the Soviet Union (PI: David Laitin and Jerry Hough).

2) New collections of significance at the University of Chicago: ( I can
provide more details if interested) Taiwan Women and Family Survey, 1988
Nationality and Politics...... (Laitin and Hough) Chinese General
Social Survey (PI: William Parish, et al)

3) Other "In Development" News

UNIX tools to facilitate the creation of SAS and/or SPSS extraction
programs. Briefly, SAS and SPSS set up statements are good things, but
most users rarely want all variables that are available and editting
these files is often more problematic than writing the data step code
from scratch. We're spec'ing PERL program code that will make it
easier for users to write data step syntax derived from existing SAS,
SPSS or generic data dictionary files.

Sometime in the next few months we'll be adding a "data programmer"
to our staff who will be responsible for working with faculty to produce
analytic files from complex data collections. For example, social
network files from key aging collections such as AHEAD and HRS.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Ann Green

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Acting Director

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Social Science Statistical Lab, Yale University

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   203-432-3277

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   ann.green@yale.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://statlab.stat.yale.edu

### Activities

Addition to my earlier submission re. the SGML DTD:

ICPSR will receive funding from the US National Science Foundation for
the beta testing of the SGML DTD (the standard for marking up codebooks
being developed by the Data Documentation Initiative). Among the
activities will be: documenting the DTD, intensive testing of the ease
of use and the applicability of the DTD, evaluating authoring and
viewing software, and working with other archives in converting OSIRIS
codebooks into SGML codebooks. The funding also provides for maintaining
the DTD for the period of the grant, for preparation of a manual, and
preparation of a tag library. This was held to be an "extraordinarily
valuable" set of activities, consistent with NSF's mandate to push the
frontier and to develop new technologies. Also included is limited
funding for preparing PDF format codebooks.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Patrica C. (Patty) Becker

**Contact_Title:** 
:   President/Executive Director

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   APB Associates/SE MI Census Council

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   313-535-2077

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   313-535-3556

**Contact_Email:** 
:   pbecker@umich.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

On the national front: I'm representing the ACLU on the 2000 Census
Advisory Committee as well as PAA on the Census Advisory Comm. of
Professional Associations and the Southeast Michigan Census Council on
the American Community Survey Product Development Group. This means a
lot of trips to Washington! I have monitored all aspects of the 2000
census plan, and the issues in Congress, very carefully.

On the APB Associates front (this is how I earn my living): I've
conducted special censuses in several fast-growing communities so they
can get more money from the state of Michigan; provided general data
service in response to inquiries; provided Margo Anderson of
UW-Milwaukee with a large number of historic materials related to the
Census Bureau; continued my work in Jewish demography, and other
assorted activities. Coming up is a contract with the City of Detroit to
help them prepare for the 2000 census. I am the source of last resort
for information about the City of Detroit and respond to many inquiries
in that regard. Part of my City contract includes going through old
materials and data files to determine what should be kept and what
should be converted from mainframe tapes to other storage vehicles
and/or to PC readable files for active use.

On the Southeast Michigan Census Council front: I write a monthly
newsletter which combines information about what's happening in
Washington with articles on new data releases (especially if they have
local numbers) and pointers to access interesting data sources in print
or on the Internet. The Council also sponsors several luncheons with
speakers each year. We also publish census tract coding guides for the 8
county region and I'm preparing to produce updated editions this year.
We also on on-line geocoding on request.

All in all, I keep busy!

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Judith S. Rowe

**Contact_Title:** 
:   "Data Detective"

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Data and Statistical Services, Social Science Reference Center,
    Firestone Library

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   609 258-6052

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   609 258-6104

**Contact_Email:** 
:   Judith@Princeton.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.princeton.edu/~data/

### Activities

We have had many inquiries about "life in the library." As almost
everyone knows we moved on July 1, 1996 from CIT to the University
Library where we were welcomed by one and all. The move took place. as a
result of strong protests by Princeton faculty, staff and students and
by outside supporters including IASSIST members who had heard of our
projected demise. Data and Statistical Services is now a unit of the
Social Science Reference Center and financial support is provided by
several academic departments, the Provost's Office and the Library. CIT
continues to pay for and install the statistical software which DSS
supports, provide online disk space, and maintain the automated Tape
Mount Service. DSS continues to provide a central service with the same
number of FTEequivalents which we had when we left CIT but fewer than we
had had five years ago. I provide most of the data reference and data
acquisition services but all of the social science librarians are now
comfortable searching our Data Catalog and locating codebooks. Access to
CD's and diskettes is provided at the SSRC reference desk and duplicate
codebooks (of which we have many) are allowed to circulate All orders
requiring direct payment (i.e. except Roper, ICPSR and donated titles)
are handled by a very cooperative Order Department. Lisa Cziffra is
officially assigned to Cataloging but spends some time each week in SSRC
and at least informally is still designated as our Data Librarian. She
continues to handle our "technical services" and maintain our SPIRES
catalog, We were fortunate in being able to hire two experienced
consultants: Linda Windeler, who formerly worked at UCLA's Academic
Data Service after completing a PhD in Sociology and Paul Bern who
worked as a consultant at Syracuse while completing a PhD in
Communications. Linda and Paul are assisted by several grad students and
Lisa by several undergrads. DSS provides all support of statistical
packages and all statistical consultation on campus. Economics has
always been our greatest source of users but since moving to the Library
it has provided an increased number of users of data from DataStream and
other products containing financial data as well as of health data and
labor data downloaded from the Internet. Linda continues to add
documentation and data to our home page and to develop a range of
classes in order to reduce the amount of one on one assistance we
provide. Both Linda and Paul see users by appointment and Paul runs the
afternoon walkin service which at times this spring had as many as eight
students with individual problems simultaneously. Usage has increased
for several reasons: the number of students now downloading data from
sources not part of the Data Library's holdings, the newly established
quantitative requirement for undergraduates who have always been
required to write both Junior Papers and Senior Theses and our proximity
to reference librarians and printed sources which if need be can be
manually entered. . My own personal activities have included
participation in several Census 2000 activities, serving on the
Curriculum Advisory Board for thenew Library School being established by
the University of Torun in Poland, participation in the National
Archives strategic planning and providing assistance in the planning of
the Council of Industrial Relations Librarians (CIRL) 50th conference
being held in April in Princeton. I represented Princeton at a meeting
of the Social Science Digital Library Consortium (SSDLC) in Boston. Also
present were Walter Bourne, Ann Gray, Ann Gerken Green and Jim Jacobs,
Ilona Einowski is also involved in this activity and since she and Jim
are the "oldtimers" they might provide a more comprehensive
description of these activities. You might also add to Sarah Cox's
activities the fact that at my instigation she has been invited to speak
at Princeton on May 1 and the Library is really rolling out the red
carpet for her.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Tess Trost

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Social Sciences Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Texas Tech University Library

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   806.742.2236

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   LITKT@ttacs.ttu.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

I haven't done anything great data related, but I was accepted to the
Texas Library Association's Leadership Development Institute. It's
called TALL TEXANS, but I'm not sure I want you to tell everyone that,
especially since I'm so short! The Institute is intended to teach
leadership tools, interpersonal skills and problem-solving techniques.
It is also supposed to help one learn to assess and enhance leadership
styles and capabilities. There are 24 participants, chosen
competitively, who meet for a week with an orginizational development
consultant and mentors who are established in the Texas library field in
an informal setting. I've heard it is a great program, and I'm looking
forward to attending. My feelings will not be hurt at all if you don't
include this information. Cheers and hope to see you in Denmark, Tess

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Peter E. Schinkel

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Records Management Program Manger

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   GA Department of Archives and History

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   404 656-2373

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   404 656-2949

**Contact_Email:** 

:   

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.sos.state.ga.us/Archives

### Activities

I attempt to manage Georgia's government records retention schedule
application process. My 1996 professional activity was in the National
Association of Government Archives and Records Administrators (NAGARA).

Served as program co-chair for the 1996 annual meeting held in
Washington, D.C. July, 1996..

Became a member of NAGARA's board of directors in 1996.

Probably will become NAGARA vice-president in 1997.

Was team leader of the 1996-97 membership survey team. Results of the
survey will be published in the Winter 1997 _NAGARA Clearinghouse_.

For more information on NAGARA, visit <<http://www.nagara.org%3E>. We
welcome IAASIST members to join us in Sacramento for the 1997 annual
meeting, July, 1997.

Also, spoke on Georgia's governement records retention schedule
application process at the Georgia Records Association (GRA) annual
conference in Savannah, GA, April, 1996.

------------- Note. My primary reason for joining IAASIST
was to get a copy of an article by Margaret Hedstrom. Have not been able
to attend any IAASIST functions, but have enjoyed the Journal and soem
of the info on the list, so I have remained a member. Thanks for letting
me lurk.

Pete Schinkel - 4/11/97

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Diane Geraci

**Contact_Title:** 

:   

**Contact_Organization:** 

:   

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 

:   

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   dgeraci@library.lib.binghamton.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

Jim Jacobs and Diane Geraci, with Canadian member Chuck Humphrey, taught
a one-week workshop for the seventh consecutive summer in the ICPSR
Summer Program on the management of computer-readable social science
information.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   ANNE LIGHTFOOT COOPER

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Senior Special Librarian Emerita

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   University of Wisconsin, CDE

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   608-238-5575

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   608-231-2312

**Contact_Email:** 
:   cooper@ssc.wisc.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

In May 1995, I waw diagnosed with lung cancer; on August 2, 1995, I went
on medical leave from my position of Data Library Director for the
Center for Demography & Ecology at the University of Wisconsin--
Madison. In Nov., 1995, I had a stroke from which I seemed to recover
very well. I started driving again in April, 1996. Off and on from
October 1995 through May 1996, I had chemotherapy, which led to an
apparent remission in June -December 1996. In March 1997, we found that
the tumor had grown and are now looking a more chemotherapy, expecting
to start in April 1997. I don't have a web site, but do send out
periodic updates on how things are going with me to an email list of
friends. I don't use a listserver, just a list. I deeply appreciate the
support and good vibes and thoughts I've received from my IASSIST
friends. On May 13, 1997, the CDE is giving a retirement bash for me and
for Ruth Sandor, who started the CDE print library; we are really happy
that Barbara Aldrich, who created the CDE data library and went on to
greater glory at the Census Bureau, will be able to come to the party
from D.C. Best to all... keep in touch. Anne Lightfoot Cooper
(4/13/1997) 2701B University Ave., #403, Madison WI 53705 in US,
toll-free: 1-888-875-2233+2253 AnneCooper@CompuServe.com or
cooper@ssc.wisc.edu

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Wendy Treadwell

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Coordinator

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Machine Readable Data Center, U of MN

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   612-624-4389

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   612-626-9353

**Contact_Email:** 
:   wendy@mrdc.lib.umn.edu

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

(Off the record) First I took off every friday during the whole summer
to recover from IASSIST96 (On the record) The majority of the past year
has been spent on activities related to the Association of Public Data
Users (APDU). The loss of APDU's headquarters at Princeton University
necessitated locating a new home for APDU. I served on the search
committee for this activity which resulted in the movement of APDU
Headquarters to the Department of Business and Economic Research at the
University of New Orleans in September 1996. During this same period I
served as the Conference Committee Chair and organized APDU96 which was
held in Washington, D.C. October 28-30, 1996 with a one day
mini-conference on Geography the following day.

On January 1, 1997 I began a two-year elected term as Vice President of
APDU. I still chair the Conference Committee and am working on APDU97:
The Preservation of "Public" Data to be held October 20-22, 1997 in
Washington, D.C..

I have also been active locally in the State Data Center program as a
coordinating member of the MN State Data Center. I attended the State
Data Center National Meeting in October 1996 and have done four local
presentations to update groups on national level activities which were
reflected in both the State Data Center meeting and APDU. I serve a
co-coordinator for the Twin Cities Research Group which will be
officially incorporated later this year. This is a group of 75-100 local
researchers who meet on a monthly basis to keep up on local research
activities and data availability.

I attended the March meeting of the Council of Professional Associations
on Federal Statistics (COPAFS), The Upper Midwest Conference of
Demographics for Policy Makers (April, 1997), the Association of
Research Libraries workshop "Electronic Publishing of Data Sets on the
World Wide Web" at Harvard Univeristy in March 1997, and did beta
testing on the first DADS prototype for the Census Bureau.

(off the record) And my boss wants to know why I haven't got all my
data available for subsetting on the
web.....arghhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Thomas M. Parris

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Environmental Resources Librarian

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Harvard College Library/Harvard University

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   617.496.6158

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   617.496.0440

**Contact_Email:** 
:   tparris@fas.harvard.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://environment.harvard.edu

### Activities

1. Author of monthly "Bytes of Note" column for Environment magazine.
This column provides thematic reviews major electronic information
resources of interest to environmental scientists and policy analysts.

2. Gave invited talk to Japan-U.S. Joint Technical Workshop for the
Global Observation Information Network (GOIN) titled "Data products for
policy analysts." (June 1996).

3. Launched Harvard Environmental Resources On-Line
(<http://environment.harvard.edu)> (September 1996)

4. Invited particpant to a regional (U.S.) Environmental Protection
Agency workshop on environmental information policy.

5. Developed concept for an Environmental Science and Public Policy
archive.

6. Developed concept for a Harvard Geospatial Data Infrastructure.

7. Watched in amazement as my son David grew to be 18 months old.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Thomas E. Brown

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Chief, Archival Services Branch, Center for Electronic Records

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   National Archives and Records Administration

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   301-713-6630, ext 232

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   301-713-6911

**Contact_Email:** 
:   thomas.brown@arch2.nara.gov

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.nara.gov/nara/electronic

### Activities

The National Archives and Records Administration reorganized its
operation in January. Its Center for Electronic Records remained in tact
but moved to a new organizational unit. Currently, the agency is trying
to re-engineer its business processes with a look toward a second
reorganization this October. Compounding this organizational
uncertainty, the Center experienced a relatively high measure of staff
turn over. Despite these impediments, the Center continued to acquire
new holdings and provide reference services at an ever increasing rates.
The Center mounted its homepage in late summer of 1996. The direct
address is <<http://www.nara.gov/nara/electronic%3E>.

The Society of American Archivists named Tom Brown a Fellow of the
Society, which is the organization's highest individual honor.

Fynnette Eaton completed in April a fourteen-week the Advanced
Management Program within the Information Resources Management College
at the National Defense University in the Department of Defense.

Fynnette Eaton completed in May her two-year term as the chair of the
Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference. She also was just elected to
a three-year term on the Society of American Archivists' Council, which
is the governing body of the organization.

Mark Conrad published an article, "To Have and to Hold?: Archival
Responsibility in the Electronic Age," Irish Archives, vol.3, no 1 n.s.
(Spring 1996): 36-39.

Mark Conrad also co-edited a volume with the proceedings from a
conference, For the Record: Data Archives, Electronic Records, Access to
Research Information and the Needs of the Research Community (Dublin,
Ireland: Institute of Public Administration, 1996). It included an
article by Mark, "Electronic Records in the U.S. Federal Government:
One Archivist's Experience," pp. 64-72.

Fynnette Eaton with a co-author had a presentation, "Preservation and
Archival Issues for Electronic Records: The Center for Electronic
Records of the National Archives and Records Administration" published
in the Proceedings of the 5th Annual Federal Depository Library
Conference, April 15-18, 1996 (Washington DC: US Government Printing
Office, 1996), 18-21.

Fynnette Eaton was guest editor of a special issue of the American
Archivist (Spring 1995), Vol. 58, no. 2, focusing on case studies
concerned with electronic records. The special included a an article by
Peggy Adams, "Punch Card Records: Precursors of Electronic Records,"
pp. 182-201. It also included an article by Tom Brown, "The Freedom of
Information Act in the Information Age: The Electronic Challenge to the
People's Right to Know," pp. 202-211.

Peggy Adams co-authored an article, "The Government Information Locator
Service: Origins and Potential," Journal of Government Information,
Vol. 23, no. 4 (July/August 1996), pp. 453-462 and Vol. 23, no 5/6, pp.
747-748.

Tom Brown published an article based on his IASSIST presentation in
Quebec, "Myth or Reality: Is There A Generational Gap Among Electronic
Records Archivists?" Archivaria (Spring 1996), pp. 234-243.

Mark Conrad returned in June from teaching in the archival studies
program at University College Dublin (Ireland) as a Fulbright Scholar.
Before returning, he was invited by the Finland-U.S. Educational
Exchange Commission to visit Finland. While there, he lectured on
electronic records issues at the University of Tampere, Abo Akademi, and
the Finnish National Archives. He also participated in a seminar with
the faculty of the Department of Information Studies at the University
of Tampere.

Fynnette Eaton and Tom Brown made presentations at the Society of
American Archivists meeting in San Diego. Peggy Adams organized a
session that provided an opportunity for Libbie Stephenson to describe
the partnering between the data archives and the traditional archives at
UCLA. For the session, Peggy compiled a bibliography on social science
data archives that is now accessible on the IASSIST homepage.

Peggy Adams presented a paper on the annual meeting of the Social
Science History Association, discussed CD-ROM technology at the annual
conference of the Special Interest Group on CD-ROM Applications and
Technology (SIGCAT '96) and chaired a panel at the Association of Public
Data Users' annual conference. Fynnette Eaton discussed preserving
electronic records at a seminar sponsored by the Federal Library and
Information Center Committee and chaired a session at a mass storage
conference sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Science Center. Tom Brown
discussed functional requirements for electronic record keeping systems
at the annual Records Administration Conference (RACO) and made a
presentation on the United States' fair use doctrine in its copyright
law to the Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference. .

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Thomas E. Brown

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Chief, Archival Services Branch, Center for Electronic Records

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   National Archives and Records Administration

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   301-713-6630, ext 232

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   301-713-6911

**Contact_Email:** 
:   thomas.brown@arch2.nara.gov

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.nara.gov/nara/electronic

### Activities

The National Archives and Records Administration reorganized its
operation in January. Its Center for Electronic Records remained in tact
but moved to a new organizational unit. Currently, the agency is trying
to re-engineer its business processes with a look toward a second
reorganization this October. Compounding this organizational
uncertainty, the Center experienced a relatively high measure of staff
turn over. Despite these impediments, the Center continued to acquire
new holdings and provide reference services at an ever increasing rates.
The Center mounted its homepage in late summer of 1996. The direct
address is <<http://www.nara.gov/nara/electronic%3E>.

The Society of American Archivists named Tom Brown a Fellow of the
Society, which is the organization's highest individual honor.

Fynnette Eaton completed in April a fourteen-week the Advanced
Management Program within the Information Resources Management College
at the National Defense University in the Department of Defense.

Fynnette Eaton completed in May her two-year term as the chair of the
Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference. She also was just elected to
a three-year term on the Society of American Archivists' Council, which
is the governing body of the organization.

Mark Conrad published an article, "To Have and to Hold?: Archival
Responsibility in the Electronic Age," Irish Archives, vol.3, no 1 n.s.
(Spring 1996): 36-39.

Mark Conrad also co-edited a volume with the proceedings from a
conference, For the Record: Data Archives, Electronic Records, Access to
Research Information and the Needs of the Research Community (Dublin,
Ireland: Institute of Public Administration, 1996). It included an
article by Mark, "Electronic Records in the U.S. Federal Government:
One Archivist's Experience," pp. 64-72.

Fynnette Eaton with a co-author had a presentation, "Preservation and
Archival Issues for Electronic Records: The Center for Electronic
Records of the National Archives and Records Administration" published
in the Proceedings of the 5th Annual Federal Depository Library
Conference, April 15-18, 1996 (Washington DC: US Government Printing
Office, 1996), 18-21.

Fynnette Eaton was guest editor of a special issue of the American
Archivist (Spring 1995), Vol. 58, no. 2, focusing on case studies
concerned with electronic records. The special included a an article by
Peggy Adams, "Punch Card Records: Precursors of Electronic Records,"
pp. 182-201. It also included an article by Tom Brown, "The Freedom of
Information Act in the Information Age: The Electronic Challenge to the
People's Right to Know," pp. 202-211.

Peggy Adams co-authored an article, "The Government Information Locator
Service: Origins and Potential," Journal of Government Information,
Vol. 23, no. 4 (July/August 1996), pp. 453-462 and Vol. 23, no 5/6, pp.
747-748.

Tom Brown published an article based on his IASSIST presentation in
Quebec, "Myth or Reality: Is There A Generational Gap Among Electronic
Records Archivists?" Archivaria (Spring 1996), pp. 234-243.

Mark Conrad returned in June from teaching in the archival studies
program at University College Dublin (Ireland) as a Fulbright Scholar.
Before returning, he was invited by the Finland-U.S. Educational
Exchange Commission to visit Finland. While there, he lectured on
electronic records issues at the University of Tampere, Abo Akademi, and
the Finnish National Archives. He also participated in a seminar with
the faculty of the Department of Information Studies at the University
of Tampere.

Fynnette Eaton and Tom Brown made presentations at the Society of
American Archivists meeting in San Diego. Peggy Adams organized a
session that provided an opportunity for Libbie Stephenson to describe
the partnering between the data archives and the traditional archives at
UCLA. For the session, Peggy compiled a bibliography on social science
data archives that is now accessible on the IASSIST homepage.

Peggy Adams presented a paper on the annual meeting of the Social
Science History Association, discussed CD-ROM technology at the annual
conference of the Special Interest Group on CD-ROM Applications and
Technology (SIGCAT '96) and chaired a panel at the Association of Public
Data Users' annual conference. Fynnette Eaton discussed preserving
electronic records at a seminar sponsored by the Federal Library and
Information Center Committee and chaired a session at a mass storage
conference sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Science Center. Tom Brown
discussed functional requirements for electronic record keeping systems
at the annual Records Administration Conference (RACO) and made a
presentation on the United States' fair use doctrine in its copyright
law to the Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference. .

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Kent Treichel

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Research Associate

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Wilder Research Center

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   612-647-4636

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   612-647-4623

**Contact_Email:** 
:   mapman@visi.com

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

My projects have more of a geographic bent to them than strictly data
archiving and providing. The research center relased it's second annual
Social Indicators publication which included a variety of data that
attempted to update some Census data. I have spent the last year serving
on a local data sharing task force called Metro GIS. This organization
is attempting to combine data from a variety of sources and provide this
data to it's members. It has been a long process of visioning, focus
groups, needs surveys and committee work. In the words of Dilbert,
"Next year we plan to add content". As a member of the State Data
Center, I continue to answer inquiries from the community. Boy, is the
Census data getting old. Can't wait until the 2000 Census. In an effort
to get our data to the public, I have been tasked to set up a web server
running Linux. Not a difficult task perhaps, except that I am UNIX
illiterate. Hopefully, I can pick it up as I go along.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Ann Janda

**Contact_Title:** 
:   Data consultant

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Northwestern University Library

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   847-491-4090

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   847-491-8306

**Contact_Email:** 
:   a-janda@nwu.edu

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.library.nwu.edu/data

### Activities

We have had a very busy and challenging year at NU with only one FTE
(yours truly) and 2 marvelous grad assistants (about 1/2 FTE).

This past year we had a 24% increase in user contacts over last year!
Much of the increased traffic was in undergraduate use -- mainly due to
more quantitative requirements for the undergraduate program in
Mathematical Methods in Social Science and the Economics Senior Honors
Program. Other patterns showed (1) an increased demand for data outside
of ICPSR and Roper (our usual suppliers), (2) more frequent use of the
internet to identify sources of data, (3) heavier and more
time-consuming tehcnical support provided to undergrads because of their
inexperience, (4) increased expectations in moving data across platforms
and translating files to "fit" the user's desktop, and (5) an
increase in fielding and referring of general statistical questions as
one is identified as responsible for "data" in the library.

While we focused our energies on reference, accessing data and data
extraction -- the operational side has weakened. With the convenience
of ftp transfers, the pace of data acquisition has speeded up while
internal recordkeeping is struggling to keep up. I worry about cutting
corners.

We have changed our name from Data Services to Social Science Data
Services (SSDS). It's simply a nicer acronym for the web. And I've
learned, it doesn't discourage our outlier users from the medical
school, school of management, transportation department, and others from
seeking out our services.

And we finally managed to put up a *modest* website!
(<http://www.library.nwu.edu/data> I love showing off the "links to
other sites" where users can go to more powerful and comprehensive
sites created by fellow IASSISTers and other data archives. I'm
grateful to you all.

Time for professional activity and development projects is more lacking
than ever before -- but nonetheless viewed as important! I hope next
year shows some improvement.

As past editor, I contributed to article : "The SIGCHI Bulletin:
Interview with the Editors" by Steven Pemberton in SIGCHI Bulletin, 28,
1 (January 1996), a special issue celebrating 50 Years of ACM.
Electronic version:
<http://www.acm.org/sigs/sigchi/bulletin/1996.1/bulletin.html>

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Sue A. Dodd

**Contact_Title:** 

:   

**Contact_Organization:** 

:   

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 

:   

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   usdodd@ibm.net

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

Laura asked me to report, so I am happy to say that retirement is great
and although I have come to closure with the Institute for Research in
Social Science, at the University of North Carolina, I remain interested
in the activities of IASSIST and my friends and colleagues within. I
have just renewed my membership and want to wish IASSIST every continued
success. I am proud of my association with IASSIST, now and in the past,
and it has been especially pleasing to see IASSIST grow from a fledgling
organization to an impressive and important voice for all data
professionals. Keep up the good work! and remember

SHOW ME THE CITATION!

Sue A. Dodd Chapel Hill, NC

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Jonathan E. Robbin

**Contact_Title:** 
:   President

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   Ricercar, Inc.

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 
:   301-229-3539

**Contact_FAX:** 
:   301-229-5186

**Contact_Email:** 
:   ricercar@access.digex.net

**Contact_URL:** 

:   

### Activities

Eight years ago, I sold my interest in Claritas Corporation, the company
that I had founded in 1971. My principle activity from that time to the
present has been the development and application of new models and
systems for enhancing, editing, transforming, processing and adapting
social, economic and environmental secondary data for use in direct,
retail and mass marketing, epidemiology, conservation, journalism,
political communications and strategic business planning.

I am currently engaged in building methods and models for geographic
interpolation of PUMS tabulations from the PUMA down to the ZIP Code and
Block Group levels. For example, the subpopulation of farm households is
not crosstabulated by any other items in the STF3 small area summary
data and omits "urban" farms (by the census definition of urban which
includes small towns). In a recent effort, I have estimated many items
such as age, race, income, ancestry, education, occupation, family
relationships and configurations, tenure, water and sewer, age and type
of dwelling unit, and so forth exclusively for farm households in
five-digit ZIP Code delivery zones.

Other work in progress involves intercensal estimates of a number of
population and housing census variables and development of factorial
ecologies for small areas. One such typology includes an integration of
social and economic data at small area levels with data derived from the
Census of Agriculture, land use attributes, and physical characteristics
of the soil and landscape.

I have recently finished the development of a new and seemingly quite
efficient multivariate "gravity" model for evaluating retail store
locations of various sizes, kinds of merchandise and commercial
ambiances considering potential sales volume as a function of both the
socioeconomic characteristics and distances to the store site of the
various consumer populations in a trading area.

I filled a vacant seat of the Board of Directors of APDU in October,
1996 and was elected a Director for a full term in 1997. I am currently
serving as Chairman of APDU's Membership Committee and am working not
only to promote a broadened constituency for the organization, but also
to identify and implement new services and products that APDU can offer
to enhance and expand the many important benefits it currently offers to
its members. I would welcome any comments or suggestions regarding this
undertaking as well as, of course, any inquiries regarding APDU itself.

**Contact_FullName:** 
:   Robert Johnston

**Contact_Title:** 

:   

**Contact_Organization:** 
:   United Nations

**Contact_WorkPhone:** 

:   

**Contact_FAX:** 

:   

**Contact_Email:** 
:   johnstonr@un.org

**Contact_URL:** 
:   http://www.un.org

### Activities

In a speech to a United Nations governmental working group on
informatics in New York on 24 April (<http://www.un.org>, under
"General Information, Press Releases"), the new Secretary-General,
Kofi Annan, cited recent developments in the fields of communications
and information technology as key to the future work of the Organization
and to the Organization's support of development worldwide. Access
through Internet to the UN Statistics Division's Monthly Bulletin of
Statistics, was specifically cited by the Secretary-General as a model
for future work. Robert Johnston, who credits IASSIST with introducing
him to the Internet and encouraging him to explore all the possibilities
it offers, directs the work of the Bulletin and managed its movement
onto Internet, where the first postings were made in May of 1996.
Johnston, along with a dozen colleagues in other fields, had earlier
been given an "efficiency award" by the UN's Under-Secretary-General
for Administration and Management for the innovation and success of the
UN's first home page. It is now heartening and exciting to see a
full-scale Internet strategy established by the Secretary-General
himself.
