+++
nid = "3412"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 1997-1998: Europe"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-1997-1998-europe"
date = "2013-05-19 03:53:28 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Report of the European Regional Secretary

by
Bridget Winstanley
The Data Archive
University of Essex, UK
May 1998

**INTERNATIONAL PROJECTS**

IASSIST members were involved in a number of projects with European
Union funding spanning several European countries.

**CASA**

Peter Burnhill, President of IASSIST, has been involved with the
Edinburgh Data Library in CASA, a 4^th^ Framework project on serials and
articles and the role of identifiers applied to datasets.

**DOSIS programme** 
:   Joanne Lamb at the Centre for Educational Studies in Edinburgh wrote
    to say
    
    "We have two EU funded projects in the DOSIS programme, which is
    managed by Eurostat, and also two others on comparative analysis of
    school leavers and labour force data from 6 European countries. So
    we have an interesting mix of technical development and substantive
    analysis. We should have two more similar projects starting in the
    autumn, one of which is an interesting extension as it is looking at
    the evaluation and dissemination of educational multimedia
    products.

<!-- -->

**NESSTAR Project** 
:   The Networked European Social Science Tools and Resources (NESSTAR)
    project is a partnership of The Data Archive, the Norwegian Data
    Archive, the Danish Data Archive and is under the sponsorship of the
    Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA). There are
    associated contractors from Ireland, Spain, and Norway, a total of
    five in all. The purpose of the project is to develop a set of
    generic data browsing tools that will make it easier to locate
    multiple data sources across national boundaries, browse detailed
    information about these data, tabulate and visualise these data,
    disseminate these data and documentation in whole or part in forms
    suitable for immediate use. The Project Coordinator, is Simon
    Musgrave, now Acting Director of the Data Archive.

<!-- -->

**ILSES project** 
:   Since ILSES (Integrated Library and Survey Data Extraction Service)
    was reported upon for the 1997 Regional Report, the following
    progress has been made:

-   All modules for content providing (bibliographic references, data
    documentation and linking the two with thesaurus based keywords and
    direct links) have been finished.
-   Data documentation can also be imported and exported in the DDI
    format.
-   The module for end-users is well under way (access with different
    views to the integrated information on publications and data ;
    subsetting and automated dataset building across time and across
    regions).
-   User testing is planned for by end of 1998.

ILSES can be found at . Further information is available from Repke de
Vries, e-mail .

**ECASS** 
:   The European Centre for Analysis in the Social Sciences (ECASS) is
    funded as one of only two large-scale facilities in Europe for
    research and data analysis in the social sciences, it is supported
    by the Training and Mobility of Research (TMR) Programme of the
    European Commission. Interested researchers from Europe can apply
    for travel and subsistence grants to come to Essex to undertake
    research for periods of one week to three months using the resources
    available at the University of Essex.
    
    ECASS is an interdisciplinary research centre which conducts and
    facilitates the empirical study of social and economic change by
    integrating longitudinal and cross- national European datasets,
    providing support services required for their analyses, and acting
    as the host for major substantive research programmes, primary among
    them being longitudinal household panel and time budget studies.
    
    The Centre is coordinated by Marcia Freed Taylor, email:
    <ecass@essex.ac.uk>
    
    [http://www.irc.essex.ac.uk/ecass](/web/20070714180432/http://www.irc.essex.ac.uk/ecass)
    

**NEWS FROM INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES**

**IRELAND**

**Irish Data Archive Feasibility Report**

In January 1997, the Royal Irish Academy commissioned The Data Archive
to assist in assessing the feasibility of setting up an Irish data
archive. Kevin Schurer, an independent consultant, carried out the work
in close collaboration with The Data Archive. In March 1998 the report
was launched at a seminar at the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin. The
event was opened by Professor John Jackson, chairman of the Irish Social
Science Research Council, followed by papers presented by Dr Kevin
Schurer, Professor Frances Ruane, chair of the National Statistics
Board, Dr Michael Marsh of Trinity College, Dublin and by Professor
Brendan Whelan, director of the Economic and Social Research Institute.
Bridget Winstanley, representing the Archive, participated in the very
positive discussion which followed the formal programme.

Ken Hannigan of the Irish National Archive, who is an IASSIST member,
played an active liaison role in the production of this report.

**NETHERLANDS**

**Project EconData**

EconData started in 1996 as a project by SWIDOC's Steinmetz Archive.
Since the merging of SWIDOC in NIWI, EconData is now run by NIWI's
product group digital data archives. The EconData project, supported by
NWO is an initiative for broadening NIWI's data services to include
economic data sets. New services will be established to support economic
research, including macro-economics, business economics and economic
modelling. In addition the more traditional functions of a data archive,
the project puts strong emphasis on data brokerage. The data service
will act as an intermediary between suppliers of economic data and data
users. This will include suppliers of international data and users of
dutch data abroad. For this purpose the project plan includes the
establishment of an online register of available data sets, irrespective
of whether these data sets are available from the Steinmetz Archive or
from other sources.

Up until April 1998 more than 200 economic data have been registered.
Descriptions of most of these data sets are available in the on-line
database. Since the beginning of the project more than 40 economic data
sets have been deposited at the Steinmetz Archive. These data sets are
available under standard conditions to users of the Steinmetz Archive.

For further information see http:www.niwi.knaw.nl or contact the
project manager, Albert Bots, e-mail <albert.bots@niwi.knaw.nl> or
telephone +31 (0)20 462 8625.

**DDDI - Dutch Data Documentation Initiative**

With support from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO) NIWI started a project to integrate the existing Dutch data
documentation procedures of Steinmetz Archive, NHDA and others. The
resulting standards and documentation system will follow the latest
international examples, including the Data Documentation Initiative
(DDI). For this purpose the DDI proposal has been translated into a
relational data model. This will be implemented in an Oracle database.
The results of this project are expected to be available by the
beginning of 1999. Further information is available from Harry
Heemskerk, e-mail .

**Academical Digital Heritage**

The NHDA, now part of NIWI, together with the University of Leiden
conducted a study on the long-term preservation of the digital resources
of Dutch universities. The study has been conceived in a national
framework, as it was also financed by a national body. The result has
been a report, published in February 1998: "Academisch Digitaal
Erfgoed" (Academical Digital Heritage). The study focuses on the policy
implications of long-term preservation of the digital collections of the
university.

Although narrower in scope this research seems to be comparable with the
one carried out in the United Kingdom by the AHDS (Digital Collections:
A strategic policy framework for creating and preserving digital
resources).

Further information is available from Heiko Tjalsma, e-mail .

**Dutch censuses 1795-1971**

In close cooperation with Statistics Netherlands (CBS) NIWI is working
on the digitization of the census results of the Netherlands between
1795 and 1971. Through a combination of data-entry and scanning/optical
character recognition techniques, databases are being produced based on
the published results. These databases which will become available both
on the Internet or on CD-ROM. As a first result the census of 1899 will
be published in 1999 on the occasion of the centenary of Statistics
Netherlands. After 1999 other census years will follow. Further
information is available from Peter Doorn, e-mail .

**THE UNITED KINGDOM**

**The Centre for Educational Statistics, Edinburgh**

See **International projects** for news of EU funded work at the CES.

Joan Fairgrieve, who was the Data Librarian for Edinburgh University has
recently (re)joined CES, and her insights as a data supplier have been
very beneficial to the projects. Further information can be found at the
CES home page: [](http://www.ed.ac.uk/~ces)<http://www.ed.ac.uk/~ces>

**AHDS/The Data Archive**

The Arts and Humanities Data Service is funding the implementation at
The Data Archive (through the History Data Service) of a DDI-compliant
catalogue utilising the Cheshire information retrieval system. This is
based on international standards (SGML and Z39.50) and is currently
deployed at the University of California Berkeley and the University of
Liverpool. This catalogue will interface with an AHDS-wide integrated
catalogue.

**The Data Archive**

Denise Lievesley has left the Archive after 6 years as director. We
would like to pay tribute to her tireless energy in the cause of
statistical and social science data services worldwide while she was
director of the Archive.

Ongoing projects worthy of mention because of the involvement of IASSIST
members, are the NESSTAR project coordinated by Simon Musgrave described
above under **International projects** (Simon Musgrave) and the
Thesaurus (HASSET) and Opinion Polls projects, both directed by Bridget
Winstanley. For more details of these please see
[http://dawww.essex.ac.uk](http://dawww.essex.ac.uk/)

The Archive has compiled a report of the digital preservation needs of
United Kingdom universities and research funders which will shortly be
available in the eLib programme of studies and as a British Library
report. The title of the publication is *An Investigation into the
Digital Preservation Needs of Universities and Research Funders: the
Future of Unpublished Research Materials.*

**QUALIDATA**

The UK ESRC Qualitative Data Archival Resource Centre was established in
1994 to preserve and encourage the re-use of raw sources of
*qualitative* research data. The Centre locates, assesses and documents
qualitative data and where not already publicly archived, arranges for
their deposit in suitable public archives across the UK. Information
about such sources is then disseminated and the research community is
encouraged to re-use data.

After the mid-term review the Centre&'ss contract was renewed until the
end of 2000. Two new appointments have been made: a Senior Research
Officer working half-time to help give advice to and support researchers
in making plans for archiving data; and an additional data processing
officer working half-time.

For more details please contact:

Louise Corti, Manager, QUALIDATA Tel: (+44) 01206 873058
Department of Sociology Fax: (+44) 01206 873410
University of Essex email <cortl@essex.ac.uk>
Colchester CO4 3SQ
England

**MIDAS**

MIDAS (Manchester Information and Data Services) and the national data
centres in the UK, along with other data and information providers are
working with their funders to develop integrated access to electronic
resources to promote their use in higher education. At the heart of this
is the Joint Information Systems Committee commitment to a Distributed
National Electronic Resource.

As part of this development, MIDAS has recently become a UK mirror of
JSTOR, a US organisation providing Web access to full backruns of key
journals. These full texts, many of which are social science titles, are
available online. It is an exciting development with a commitment to
make available 100 journal titles by the year 2000. Julia Chruszcz is
Head of the National Services Group at MIDAS and is one of several
IASSIST members there.

For more details see
[http://midas.ac.uk](/web/20070714180432/http://midas.ac.uk/)
