+++
nid = "1701"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2005-2006: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2005-2006-united-states"
date = "2011-04-19 06:35:57 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2005-2006
United States
Pam Baxter
Cornell University
May 2006

### Transitions, Recognitions, and Professional Activities

The 2005/2006 membership year saw several retirements among long-time
IASSIST members. We hope that they'll continue to be active in the areas
near and dear to the IASSIST community.

Ann Janda retired as Social Science Data Services Librarian,
Northwestern University Library, and was succeeded by Kathleen Murphey.
JoAnn Dionne retired as Data Librarian at the University of Michigan
Library. Jen Green, formerly Public Services Librarian at Grinnell
College, began her new position as numeric and spatial data librarian at
the University of Michigan Library in October 2005. Diane Garner, who
played a key role in the creation of Numeric Data Services and
development of the Harvard Geospatial Library, retired in March 2006
after 15 years at HCL. Diane Geraci, a familiar face in the data service
community and previously affiliated with ICPSR, Binghamton University
Libraries, and the United Kingdom Data Archive, became the Librarian for
the Social Sciences of Harvard College Library in April 2006.

Ann Green left her post at Yale University as Director of Social Science
Research Services to pursue independent consulting activities in digital
life cycle research and planning.

Kristi Thompson and Daniel Edelstein, formerly Data Specialists with the
Data and Statistical Services, Princeton University, have assumed
positions as Data Librarian and Data Centre Manager, respectively, at
the University of Windsor (Ontario). [As a very important sidenote,
they also assumed matrimony in September 2005.]

In November 2005, Cheryl Stadel-Bevans became the first data librarian
for the Congressional Research Service (CRS) at the Library of Congress.
Before joining CRS, Cheryl at the National Archives and Records
Administration, including a four-year stint as a data archivist with the
Center for Electronic Records.

[Ilona
Einowski](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/or-public/awards/einowski.html),
data archivist at UC DATA, received the ICPSR William H. Flanigan Award
for Distinguished Service at the official representative meeting in
October.

[Bobray
Bordelon](http://library.princeton.edu/about/news/bobray041706.php),
Economics & Finance Librarian/Data Services Librarian at Princeton
University, is the recipient of the 2006 Thomson Gale Award for
Excellence in Business Librarianship. It is fitting that Bobray, a
native of Louisiana, will receive the award at the RUSA (Reference and
User Services Association) Awards Ceremony in June during the ALA Annual
Conference in New Orleans.

[Julie
Linden](http://www.ala.org/ala/godort/godortcommittees/godortawards/awards2006.htm#reynolds)
is the 2006 recipient of the NewsBank/Readex/GODORT/ALA Catharine J.
Reynolds Award.  This award provides funding for research in the field
of documents librarianship,

Julie Linden and Ann Green published an article, "[Don't Leave the
Data in the
Dark](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january06/linden/01linden.html): Issues
in Digitizing Print Statistical Publications." It appeared inthe
January 2006 issue of *D-Lib Magazine* (Volume 12, number 1).

Ron Jantz, Rutgers University, coauthored (with  Michael J. Giarlo)
"[Digital
Preservation](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june05/jantz/06jantz.html):
Architecture and Technology for Trusted Digital Repositories," which
appeared in the June 2005 issue of D-Lib Magazine (Volume 11 Number 6) 

Dan Tsang, social science data librarian at University of California,
Irvine, gave a presentation on data archiving in Asia at the
International Convention of Asian Scholars in Shanghai in August 2005
and a paper on the same topic at the World Association for Public
Opinion Research regional meeting in Hong Kong in December, 2005. At the
WAPOR conference in Hong Kong, Dan served as panel discussant on the
University of Tokyo-based AsiaBarometer ( data of the 2003survey is
available as a CD insert in Takaski Inogouchi, et al.) Values andLife
Styles in Urban Asia: A Cross-Cultural Analysis and Sourcebook Based on
the AsiaBarometer Survey of 2003, Mexico City: Siglo XXI Editores.

The Association of Public Data Users (APDU), organized in 1976 to
encourage communication among data users, producers, and distributors,
was restructured in December 2005.  Patty Becker, of APB Associates, has
been appointed as administrator and APDU moved to Southfield, Michigan.
After a one-year hiatus, the annual conference will take place in
Alexandria, Virginia in October 2006.

### Federal Statistical Agencies

Although the Census Bureau received funding support to continue 2010
Census planning and the American Community Survey, Census decided to cut
funding for the Survey of Program Participation (SIPP) in Spring 2006.
According to Howard Hogan at the Bureau, this decision was undertaken in
part to spare significant cuts to other Census activities; specifically,
the ACS and Census 2010 planning activities. (Early Congressional action
had threatened implementation of the ASC and Census 2010 test sites but
conference committee actions restored these programs.) SIPP data
collection will continue through September 2006. The current plan is to
replace SIPP with a new survey of income and wealth dynamics, possibly
in 2009 and relying more on administrative records.

Continuing support for other major statistical agencies ran the gamut,
from decline to modest increases.

Another budget-driven decision was termination of the longitudinal
National Children's Study, which experienced zeroed out funding
effective the end of fiscal year 2006. It was originally authorized by
the Children's Health Act of 2000.

### Developments in IASSIST Members' Institutions

In April 2006, the **Federal Reserve Board** implemented [Data
Download](http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/), an interactive
access and download application, delivering customized data sets in a
variety of formats.  Data Download is the first application to deliver
data in SDMX-ML,, a technical statistical data standard that is gaining
support among central banks and statistical agencies. The SDMX-ML
technical standard was developed by the Statistical Data and Metadata
Exchange (SDMX) initiative under the governance of the Bank for
International Settlements, the European Central Bank, World Bank,
International Monetary Fund, Eurostat, the United Nations, and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. [Contributed by
San Cannon]

Many projects occupied staff of the **Roper** **Center** **for Public
Opinion Research.** In October 2005, it initiated Roper*Express*, an on
demand dataset download service for its members. About 75% of the
Center's public opinion studies conducted in the US (and many recent
studies from outside of the US) are accessible via this service, and
access to additional studies is forthcoming. The Center added a
substantial collection of public opinion surveys conducted by Opinion
Dynamics for Fox News. Plans are moving forward to secure the most
recent surveys collected by IPSOS Reid on behalf of the Associated
Press. A small grant from the Canadian Embassy will fund a pilot project
to improve metadata for locating Canadian public opinion holdings of the
Center. The pilot will be unveiled at the 2006 IASSIST annual meeting
and will be made more broadly available in the summer of 2006. Under a
Library of Congress funded
[DataPass](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DATAPASS/) project, the Center has
uncovered possible new acquisitions from the NORC storage facilities.
The DataPass project has also provided the means for a data exchange of
USIA holdings at NARA and the Roper Center. Datafiles of the North
American Jewish Databank have been professionally archived by the Roper
Center. [Contributed by Lois Timms-Ferrara]

The **National Archives and Records Administration** continues to
enhance its Access to Archival Databases
([AAD](http://aad.archives.gov/aad/)) system, a discovery tool to NARA's
most popular electronic records available to the public over the
Internet. The redesigned AAD will be demonstrated at the IASSIST 2006
annual conference. In October 2005, David McMillen was appointed
External Affairs Liaison for NARA, a newly established function within
the Congressional and Communications Staff (NCON). [Contributed by
Margaret Adams]
