+++
nid = "1082"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2008-2009: Canada"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2008-2009-canada"
date = "2010-11-26 06:42:23 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2008-2009
Canada
Bo Wandschneider
University of Guelph
May 16, 2009

This will be my last regional report for a while. I look forward to
passing this on to the capable hands of Marilyn Andrews. As stated last
year it is a challenge to try and capture what is happening from such a
broad and engaged community, I can only imagine the challenges for other
regions. I thank all those who helped provide content and I apologize if
I missed something. These are in no specific order.

### National Initiatives

**CISTI (Canadian Institute for Scientific and Technical Information)**

Research Data Canada, part of CISTI, which is Canada's national science
library, has established a new working group around a [Research Data
Strategy](http://data-donnees.gc.ca/eng/members.html). This is: *"a
collaborative effort to address the challenges and issues surrounding
the access and preservation of data arising from Canadian research. This
multi-disciplinary group of universities, institutes, libraries,
granting agencies, and individual researchers are bonded by a shared
recognition of the pressing need to deal with Canadian data management
issues. Together, they will focus on the necessary actions, next steps
and leadership roles that researchers and institutions can take to
ensure Canada's research data is accessible and usable for current and
future generations of researchers."*

One of the outcomes from December 2008, is a report called [Stewardship
of Research Data in Canada: Gap
Analysis.](http://data-donnees.gc.ca/eng/about/achievements.html) This
is an excellent document outlining the current state of research data
stewardship in Canada. It identifies gaps between the current state and
an ideal state, looking at such aspects as policy, funding, roles and
responsibilities, TDR's, standards, skills and training, reward and
recognition, accessibility and preservation. There are several working
groups tackling research data management, training, rewards and
recognition, policy and technical infrastructure? IASSIST members are
closely involved in these groups.

**CARL (Canadian Association of Research Libraries)**

The Data Management Working Group in CARL has prepared a document
entitled, Data Management Awareness Toolkit, to be distributed in May,
2009. This is a briefing document to provide directors of Canadian
research libraries with background information about data stewardship.

**PUMF's**

Statistics Canada has been reviewing the creation of PUMF's to gauge
their usefulness and determine if there have been any changes in
availability and quality over time. A report to the DLI External
Advisory Committee in April 2009 indicates that the right questions are
being asked and the true value of the PUMF's has been recognized. A
recent reorganization in Statistics Canada has resulted in a new
Division dedicated to Microdata Access. There is a chance of locating a
centre of expertise in this new Division that specializes in the
production and dissemination of PUMF's. We will be keeping a close eye
on these developments over the next year. The review is now focusing on
making the PUMF's more useful with more content.

**RDC Network**

Breckenhill Inc, a Canadian software developer, is heading up an
international consortium of developers that, through a competitive bid,
was awarded the contract to create a suite of tools for producing DDI 3
metadata. The resulting tools will be available to the international
research community through an open source license. A Research Metadata
Centre was opened recently in Gatineau, Quebec to produce DDI metadata
for the confidential data files now housed in the RDC Network.
Furthermore, a project is underway to connect all centres and branches
in the Canadian RDC Network through a lighpath articulate private
network over Canada's high-speed optical research network. Previous to
this, all facilities have operated their own internal local area
networks, completely isolated from one another. A testbed of four
centres is operational now. Eighteen other facilities will be connected
over the next eight months.

**DLI**

DLI is continuing to mark up data in DDI and making the metadata
available to all via the web. This markup is fully bilingual
(English/French) and the resulting metadata are available to all via
<http://www62.statcan.ca/webview/>

Statistics Canada is contemplating opening access to PUMFs to groups
outside the DLI. A proposal is being prepared aiming at giving access to
various organizations within or outside Canada based on a subscription
fee which also needs to be determined.
There is also some discussions with some colleges and universities who
would like to join the DLI. Presently, we now have 74 members but this
number could increase again in the next few months.

A Training the Trainers session is being prepared. The last one was held
a few years ago and was quite successful in insuring new people as
trainers or as training coordinators. The DLI is counting on that
initiative to bring on board new people in view of replacing some other
people who will be retiring in the near future.

**CAPDU**

On March 20, 2009 CAPDU held its first virtual AGM. One of the main
outcomes of this meeting was the revival and renewal of several
committees. Members of one committee, the Metadata committee will be
assessing DDI uptake in Canada and working towards a developing a
National DDI presence. We are excited about new ventures coming from
CAPDU over the next year.

### Provincial Initiatives

**Ontario Data Extraction System and Infrastructure**

After several years of planning, meeting, volunteering, strategising,
creating, and regularly revisiting and improving,
<[odesi](http://odesi.ca/)> has reached maturity and is graduating to
the position of full-fledged service at [Scholar's
Portal](http://www.scholarsportal.info/). This was accomplished through
the Ontario University community's astonishing level of grass-roots
engagement in the project. Committed volunteers have worked to enhance
the collection, create training modules, mark up French data, and
contributed to the design and vision of a new and sophisticated search
interface, which renders 's search capacity incredibly powerful.
Developed at Scholar's Portal using a Mark Logic front end the new
search leverages the DDI XML files to allow for a fast and feature rich
search of the collection. We are also extremely proud of 's new French,
search interface to access our growing French metadata collection. The
search tools in are open to anyone.

The collection has grown at a staggering rate. We've imported the DDI
metadata from important and diverse collections such as CORA and ICPSR,
allowing the user to search for multiple variables, in multiple
collections, with a single search through 's sophisticated interface.
Our collection of public opinion polls has also grown to include the
likes of Leger, Ipsos Ried, Gallup... now hosts the records for more
than 280,000 variables.

Last but not least, the DDI Best Practices Document has evolved,
garnering input and feedback from the both the national and
international DDI community. The BPD is proving a core document in the
construction of what will be a forward-thinking, collaborative,
data-sharing community.

**[ACCOLEDS](http://datalib.library.ualberta.ca/accoleds/)**

Maxine Tedesco (University of Lethbridge) has been coordinating the
Table-to-Data (T2D) project over the past year while on a research
leave. She has searched the literature about possible linkages between
publications and primary data. Her findings corroborate that little work
has been done in the digital preservation and publishing realm that
align with the T2D project. Maxine has developed a bibliography on
T2D-related topics. While there has been a lot of development around
marking up tables for display and special mark-up for the visually
impaired, very little has been published about marking up content within
tables to facilitate better searching or linking with primary data.

Chuck Humphrey and Maxine spoke in late February about tangible next
steps in testing table mark-up. Maxine will create a list of highlights
from the bibliography she has compiled and place this summary on the T2D
wiki. She will also identify a typical table found in Tablebaseâ„¢,
describing the metadata they provide. Based on this example, members of
the working group will be asked to critique the utility of these
metadata for discovery and linkage purposes. The outcomes of this
discussion will be used to draft better metadata elements and to develop
ways of marking up this information. The working group will also be
asked to find exemplary tables that would benefit from enhanced mark-up
and then to comment on what this enhancement will entail.

**OCUL (Ontario Council of University Libraries) Map Group**

The OCUL map group is developing a proposal to create a Geospatial Data
Portal. It is the vision of the proposal to establish a shared
infrastructure, operated as part of OCUL Scholars Portal services for
storing and delivering geospatial data to students, faculty, staff, and
researchers affiliated with Ontario's 19 universities. This
infrastructure will enable the development of a shared interface for
search, discovery and access to geospatial data and new models for
acquiring and licensing geospatial data through consortium purchasing.

The project has recently received provincial funding and is currently in
the process of establishing it's governance structure and hiring project
staff. More to come.

That's all for this year.
