+++
nid = "1078"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2007-2008: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2007-2008-united-states"
date = "2010-11-26 04:52:42 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2007-2008
United States
Pam Baxter
Cornell University
May 2008

### National Statistical Agencies

Last year's regional report began with the stir regarding Census Bureau
leadership. *Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose*. Steven Murdock
was confirmed as Director in December, 13 months after his predecessor
announced his intention to resign. Jay Waite, a 38-year employee of the
Bureau appointed Deputy Director and in February 2007, retired in May
2008. Thomas Mesenbourg, another long-time Census employee, was
appointed to the role on an interim basis. Census leadership has been a
frequent visitor to Capitol Hill, putting forth requests for
supplemental funding for a Census less than 2 years away. This as the
Bureau decided to shelve use of hand-held computers for non-response
followup and struggles to cope with increasing costs while implementing
the 2008 Census Dress Rehearsal and the Economic Census.

More than one well-known, national survey was saved from extinction over
the past year. Funding for SIPP was secured in mid-2007. A variety of
funders (Federal Highway Administration, Federal Transit Administration,
and the American Association of Retired Persons) stepped forward to save
the National Household Travel Survey, which began in 1969.

### National Data Projects

In August, the [Data-PASS
Project](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DATAPASS/index.html) received
funding from the Library of Congress to extend its work for an
additional 18 months. DataPASS participants presented at a variety of
professional and scholarly venues, including the American Library
Association (June 2007, Washington), Society of American Archivists
(August 2007, Chicago), the e-Social Science Conference (October 2007,
Ann Arbor), and is scheduled for this summer's American Sociological
Association meeting in Boston.

### Developments in IASSIST Members' Institutions

The [Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research](http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu/) established its new
residence at the University of Connecticut this year, with its board of
directors signing a five year agreement to maintain the Center in
Storrs. The Roper Center's membership family has expanded significantly
during the last year with forty new members since last summer. The
Center focused its acquisitions efforts on international collections.
More than 500 United States Information Agency surveys were acquired
from NARA and the Department of State as part of the Data-PASS
partnership. Much of this collection has been processed and available
via RoperExpress download. During the year, Roper took steps to advance
its collection of Latin American datasets by signing an agreement with
CIDE of Mexico City. It will also seek funding to update and acquire new
collections of survey materials from this region.

### Transitions, Recognitions, and Professional Activities

San Cannon (Federal Reserve Bank) recently presented on the topic of
RSS-CB specification in Geneva at the UNECE Statistical Commission Work
Session on Dissemination and Communication. The paper extended the work
presented at the IASSIST meeting in Montreal last year.

An article co-authored by Libbie Stephenson (with UCLA colleague Patti
Caravello) was chosen as [Highly
Commended](http://info.emeraldinsight.com/authors/literati/awards.htm?jr=rsr)
as an Outstanding Paper of 2008. Awarded by the Emerald Literati
Network, content of the article first came to the attention of IASSIST
as a paper presentation at Montreal in May 2007. Its published form
appeared as "Incorporating data literacy into undergraduate information
literacy programs in the social sciences: A pilot project" (*Reference
Services Review*; Volume: 35 Issue: 4; 2007).

Katherine McNeill (MIT) serves on the Advisory Committee for the [Data
Curation Education
Program](http://cirss.lis.uiuc.edu/CollMeta/dcep.html) at the University
of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science.

Wendy Thomas (University of Minnesota) chaired the Technical
Implementation Committee of the [DDI
Alliance](http://www.ddialliance.org/). The Committee produced 4
versions of the DDI 3.0 Candidate review, and the final 3.0 version
which was accepted for publication in April. Wendy wrote the draft
version of *DDI Technical Specification Part II: User's Guide for
Candidate Review* and updated both *Part I: Overview* and *Part II: User
Guide* for the final version. With Arofan Gregory (Aeon Consulting) and
Joachim Wackero (GESIS-ZUMA), she created and presented a DDI 3.0
workshop for technical implementers and production staff at GESIS-ZUMA.

I'm sorry to close this report on a sad note: IASSIST member Jim Ovitt,
Government Data Librarian at the University of North Carolina, passed
away on April 20 at age 51. Before entering the field of library
science, he spent nearly 20 years in the media industry in New York as a
producer and director of documentary and industrial films. Jim was a
valued and respected colleague.
