+++
nid = "1706"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2007-2008: Europe"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2007-2008-europe"
date = "2011-04-19 12:18:41 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2007-2008
European Region
Mari Kleemola
Finnish Social Science Data Archive
May 22nd, 2008 (ver 0.4)

[Cross European Collaborations](#cross_european_collaborations) |
[National Reports](#national_reports)

This report begins with some observations on cross-national
collaborations, after which will be country-by-country reports of
national/institutional/individual activities. I have only included
reports for those people/organisations/countries/projects from whom I
have received information.

All in all, seems that the Europeans (at least in the field of data
archiving) have had their share of organisational changes. To mention
but a few: the Swiss archive SIDOS is now part of FORS (Swiss Foundation
for Research in Social Sciences) as of January 1, 2008; in Sweden, the
position as director of the Swedish National Data Services was
announced; In German, ZA is now part of GESIS.

[]{#cross_european_collaborations}

### Cross European Collaborations

[CESSDA PPP](#cessda) | [ESS](#ess)

[]{#cessda}

**CESSDA PPP**

The CESSDA PPP, [Preparatory Phase Project for a Major Upgrade of the
Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) Research
Infrastructure](http://www.nsd.uib.no/cessda/project/index.html), is a
major new award totalling 2.7 million euros aimed at developing the
Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) research
infrastructure (RI), and is a direct result of the CESSDA RI being
identified by the [ESFRI
Roadmap](ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/esfri/docs/esfri-roadmap-report-26092006_en.pdf)
as an existing pan-European RI recommended for a major upgrade. This
project is possible due to an award from an EU Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7) call specifically targeted at providing a preparatory
phase for RIs recognised within the ESFRI Roadmap process.

The aim of the project is to plan the future development of the CESSDA
RI and focus on tackling and resolving a number of strategic, financial
and legal issues in order to ensure that European social science and
humanities (SSH) researchers have access to, and gain support for, the
data resources they require to conduct research of the highest quality,
irrespective of the location of either researcher or data within the
European Research Area (ERA). The research is be led by Professor
Schürer, Director of the UKDA, who is the Co-ordinator for the project.

[]{#ess}

**European Social Survey (ESS)**

The European Social Survey ([ESS](http://www.europeansocialsurvey.org/))
is an academically-driven social survey designed to chart and explain
the interaction between Europe's changing institutions and the
attitudes, beliefs and behaviour patterns of its diverse populations.
The survey covers over 25 European nations and employs rigorous
methodology. Round 3 data (collected in 2006/2007; themes: Personal and
Social Well-being and Timing of Life) was released in autumn 2007 and is
freely available from the [NSD/ESS
website](http://ess.nsd.uib.no/index.jsp).

In April 2008, ESS Edunet, a training resource mainly developed for use
in higher education, launched a new [module on the subject of family,
gender and work.](http://essedunet.nsd.uib.no/cms/topics/family/)

[]{#national_reports}

### National Reports

[Finland](#finland) | [Hungary](#hungary) | [The
Netherlands](#netherlands) | [Sweden](#sweden) | [United Kingdom](#uk)

[]{#finland}

**Finland**

The Finnish universities are going through a major structural
transformation. The extensive higher education reform is being
implemented by the Ministry of Education. According to its programme,
the Government will increase the financial and administrative autonomy
of universities. separating the universities partly from the state
economy. In this connection, university governance and decision-making
will also be reformed.

For the [Finnish Social Science Data
Archive](http://www.fsd.uta.fi/english/) (FSD), the year was succesful.
The number of data access applications is growing, and the number of
archived studies is approaching one thousand. Students are a significant
user group; first time ever, the Annual Prize for the Best Master's
Thesis in Sociology in Finland was awarded to a thesis based on data
archived at the FSD. The FSD Bulletin offered a glance at archiving and
reusing qualitative material. We also produced instructions to
researchers and students on topics such as research ethics, designing
the data collection, and informing participants.

FSD continued to actively co-operate with several national units (like
Statistics Finland, National Advisory Board on Ethics and Finnish
Information Centre for Register Research). FSD is also a partner in the
CESSDA PPP, and preparations for hosting the IASSIST 2009 conference are
in full flow.

[]{#hungary}

**Hungary**

*Zoltán Lux writes:*

**The Institute for the History of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution**
The database and related Internet provision of publications, films,
websites and conferences prepared for the 50th anniversary of the 1956
Hungarian Revolution was compiled
([www.rev.hu/reviews](http://www.rev.hu/reviews)).

The first phase of exploring the life's work of major photographers
resident in Hungary was completed with support from the Specialist
Photography Council of the National Cultural Foundation. This covered
the work of six photographers (2500 photographic document, life
interviews, and digital archiving of these). The research content open
to the public can be read on the
[www.rev.hu/photographers](http://www.rev.hu/photographers).

**Historical Archives of the Hungarian State Security**
A public photography database (<https://www.abtl.hu/spyOne/login?R>) was
started on the Internet for the archives that store the document of the
state-security services in the socialist period
([www.abtl.hu](http://www.abtl.hu)).

Documents containing a great deal of sensitive information are being
kept closed in an internal database for the time being. However,
researchers with a research permit may see some of the meta-data for the
internal database on the Internet under the archives' enhanced security
conditions.

A start has been made to transferring the poorer-quality documents to
high-density OCR (using a character-recognition program to retrieve the
textual content) and entering this in a database. The large quantity of
textual information available will provide a basis for further social
scientific and archival researches.

**Nógrád County Archives**
The third phase of the Digital Library development at Nógrád County
Library ([www.nogradarchiv.hu](http://www.nogradarchiv.hu)) has been
completed. This has augmented the existing library system (fond
registers, medieval documents, institutional minutes, electronic
library, web archive, chronology, list of place names) with storage of
registry personal data.

**Developments affecting several archives**
Development of a common archiving system by the Hungarian National
Library, the Budapest Capital City Library and the Pest County Library
is intended with the archive registration and provision facility for
electronically generated documents.

[]{#netherlands}

**The Netherlands**

*Laurents Sesink writes:*

In Netherlands, the first stage of the Datakeurmerk seal of approval
([www.datasealofapproval.org](http://www.datasealofapproval.org)) became
available for use by researchers in the social sciences and humanities.
The seal of approval guarantees that data from scientific research are
filed in such a way that they will remain usable for a long time. This
first version of the Datakeurmerk contains seventeen guidelines that
data producers, data consumers and data archives must follow in order to
deserve the label 'future-proof'.

Open access (limitations apply to guarantee the privacy of respondents
and the intellectual rights of depositors) constitutes the starting
point for the conditions under which files are archived, consulted or
provided at DANS. On January 1, 2007 all Statistics Netherlands data
accessible through DANS became available to researchers free of charge.
At the end of the year, also a few basic files of the Cadastral Register
(Topographical Services) became freely available for research purposes.
The new DANS EASY (Electronic Archiving SYstem,
http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/dms), which allows researchers to archive and
download files independently, became operational in 2007. After 2,5
years DANS (DANS started in 2005) went through an intern evaluation
process. The mid term evaluation is expected to be positive.

DANS was in the year of the report involved in the following projects:

-   All awarded medium-sized NWO projects (investments) in the
    humanities (EDNA II - Taking the electronic archive for Dutch
    Archaeology to the next level; Hub for Aggregated Social History
    (HASH). Toward an integrated infrastructure for Dutch municipal
    data, 1812 - 2000; Data infrastructure for the study of guilds and
    other forms of corporate collective action in pre-industrial times);
-   Awarded startup grants for data projects, with technical advice and
    support being supplied to the digital 'collaboratorium'
    Cultural-Heritage Dendrochronology for the Low Countries and to
    Medieval Memoria Online (MeMO): construction and dynamics of
    religious social memory; stock-taking, description and supply of
    text and images with a function in the memoria in the Middle Ages;
-   The ESFRI roadmap projects Digital Research Infrastructure for the
    Arts and Humanities (DARIAH), Council of European Social Science
    Data Archives (CESSDA) and Common Language Resources and Technology
    Infrastructure (CLARIN);
-   The R&D project Migration to Intermediate XML for Electronic Data
    (MIXED), financed by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
    (PRIMA/SenterNovem);
-   The 'Alfageo' project, financed by the innovation program 'Ruimte
    voor Geo-Informatie', to stimulate the use of geodata in the
    humanities;
-   The Dutch e-science project 'Big Grid', in which DANS is working on
    grid archiving;
-   The National Coalition for Digital Preservation', in cooperation
    with the National Library and other parties;
-   A number of 'Small Data Projects', aimed at describing important
    data sets, feasibility studies, pilots and explorations in the area
    of new ways of archiving research data or making them accessible;
-   The development and implementation, in cooperation with Surf and all
    the Dutch universities of a National Resolver for Persistent
    Identifiers based on urn's.

Furthermore, agreements were made with the project 'Panel Study of
Social Dynamics in the Netherlands', financed by NWO-Maatschappij en
Gedragswetenschappen, regarding archiving of and access to the data; the
data of the Housing Investigation Netherlands (VROM) became accessible
through EASY; a data contract was entered into with the Scientific
Research and Documentation Centre WODC for archiving of and access to
WODC data and large data collections of academic researchers, such as
the most recent Dutch National Survey of Voters, were made available. In
addition, stock-taking of data was started or continued in the areas of
psychology, visual culture, language & text, and geodata.

[]{#slovenia}

**Slovenia**

*Janez Stebe writes:*

Tenth anniversary of the ADP was an occasion for institutional
presentation material redesign and promotional campaign. We concluded a
cooperation with WISDOM on processing a "Households, Work and
Flexibility 2001" international study, which is available in our
holding. Transfer of metadata study descriptions from ADP catalogue to a
Common Slovene libraries catalogue is completed. This year is new call
for infrastructure and research long-term programmes in Slovenia now
open and we reapplied, now waiting for results. We are applying on
another call on "National open data road map support study". And we
are active in a few WP in CESSDA PPP project.

[]{#sweden}

**Sweden**

*Iris Alfredsson writes:*

At the end of 2006 the Swedish Research Council invited all Swedish
universities to apply for hosting the Swedish National Data Service
(SND). In competition with four other universities the University of
Gothenburg was appointed host university, and an agreement between the
Research Council and the university was signed in November 2007. SND
will take over the operation of the current Swedish Social Science Data
Service (SSD) and extend its scope to cover databases in social
sciences, medicine, and the humanities. SND is governed by a steering
board and by a national reference group. The board of SND consists of
national representatives for the above sciences, some of which are
appointed by the Swedish Research Council, and some by the national
reference group.

[]{#uk}

**United Kingdom**

*Melanie Wright writes:*

The major award from the Economic and Social Research Council for the
running and management of the Economic and Social Data Service has been
extended for a further five years (Oct 2008 to Sep 2012).

UKDA's 40th anniversary celebrations took place in 2007.

Several interesting projects are ongoing: for example DeXT (explores the
feasibility of developing data exchange models and data conversion tools
for primary research data collected in the course of empirical
research); RELU-DSS (ensures that all data management activities are
carried out effectively within projects, and that data are offered for
archiving and sharing where possible at a UK data centre); STORE (aims
to provide use cases, guidelines and tools for the integration of data
archives with repositories of research publications); and Census
Registration Service (CRS) and Census Portal (enhances access to, and
the understanding and use of, the census data resources).

The Economic and Social Research Council (via their National Data
Strategy, <http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/nds/>) are in the course of
planning a number of new initiatives. These include the Survey Research
Network (in part a replacement for the Question Bank), a Secure Data
Service for the dissemination of disclosive microdata in secure settings
and an Administrative Data Service (advising researchers on the
availability and possibility of accessing admistrative data). Equally,
the Medical Research Council has annouced its decision to create a new
Data Dissemination Service. The UKDA maybe involved in implementation of
these, and linking them to the ESDS over the coming year.

*Ken Miller writes:*

UKDAStore, a new research output management tool is to be launched
mid-year. UKDAStore is a self-archiving repository capturing ESRC funded
datasets that don't get accepted and enhanced by the UKDA. This links
with the ESRC publications repository (Society Today) making links
between data sources, data outputs and publications; based on the StORe
(Source to Outputs) project. The project has been extended to
investigate the transfering citations of data and publications between
repositories. Hence a publication uploaded into an institutional
repository citing a UKDA dataset will have the publication cited at the
UKDA. The citations of a publication uploaded into one institutional
repository will have its own citation transfered to all the repositories
holding the citations.

*Robin Rice writes:*

IASSIST members at the Universities of Edinburgh, Oxford, Southampton
and the London School of Economics have been collaborating on the
DISC-UK DataShare project, pioneering new models for institutional data
repositories and support services for sharing data
(<http://www.disc-uk.org/datashare.html>).

EDINA is setting up a restricted access data repository for sharing
geospatial data (ShareGeo) so that license restrictions on Ordnance
Survey derived datasets can be observed, by only sharing with members of
other licensed institutions, e.g. those who have a Digimap subscription.
Much more information about EDINA's activities in bibliographic and
multimedia services, Geo-data services, scholarly communication and
learning & teaching can be found in its community report
(<http://edina.ac.uk/about/annrep/communityreportMarch08.pdf>).

The University of Edinburgh, along with 4 other funded institutions, are
piloting implementations of a new Data Audit Framework being developed
in partnership with the Digital Curation Centre to assist institutions
in providing services for data storage, management and curation to their
researchers.
(<http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/digitalrepositories2007/dataauditframework.aspx>)

The Edinburgh University Data Library is celebrating its 25th
anniversary this year.
