+++
nid = "1767"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 1999-2000: Africa"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-1999-2000-africa"
date = "2011-05-13 08:38:43 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
Report of the African Regional Secretary

By
Julia Paris
Senior Research Administrator
Research Development Unit
Technikon Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa
2000-05-15

A warm greeting from South Africa. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to tell you what is happening in South Africa and the rest
of the African Continent.

### South Africa

The South African Data Archive (hereafter SADA) was established in 1993.
SADA is a non-profit national resource centre aimed at providing and
promoting machine-readable research data and documentation to all
research organisations in South Africa, other African countries and all
other countries internationally.

SADA's catalogue of holdings comprise a wide range of areas such as:

Political Science and Election studies; Law and Criminology; Demography
and Sociology; Social work; Economics and Business Administration;
Education; Health-related studies; Census statistics and Psychology.

SADA has recently been moved to the National Research Foundation
(hereafter NRF). Over the last few months the NRF has embarked on a
process of structuring an entirely new organisation. It is hoped that
new programs will be announced, more funding opportunities would be
available, and many new services developed by mid 2000. The NRF invited
all researchers and research-related institutions to participate in the
process.

The transformation process of the NRF will also impact on SADA. The SADA
Board's term of office had been extended for one more year. There is
much controversy around the existence of the Board as a decision making
body within the new structure of the NRF.

The new Head of SADA, Dr Heston Phillips (e-mail: Hphillips@nrf.ac.za)
reported that "more than 220 new contacts have been made with
researchers and institutions. 40 data sets have been acquired, which
increased the SADA holdings from 69 completely archived data sets in
January '99 to 87 in October of '99. SADA is currently revising and
updating promotional materials and SADA forms. The second SADA
newsletter was published during the first quarter of this year. Several
seminars and workshops were held, of which Dr Nijhawan , former Director
of the Indian Data Archive, was one of the guest speakers. One SADA
staff member visited the Zentralarchiv in Germany, Steinmetz Archive
(Netherlands) and the UKDA . Another staff member visited the ICPSR at
the University of Michigan as the official South African representative
of the ICPSR, as well as the Norwegian Social Science Data Archive (NSD)
where the CESDA expert seminar was also attended.

Dr Lesaoana resigned in May of 1999.

SADA's relocation to the NRF created an opportunity for SADA to broaden
its current profile of holdings and include data from other domains of
science. SADA is in the process of establishing relations with the
Medical Research Council, and the Agricultural Research Council.

Demands for SADA services are growing. Issues that SADA is grappling
with now are Does SADA need a governing body or a Board? What should its
role be? What would be the role between the SADA Board and the NRF
Board? The other pivotal issue that SADA is struggling to work out is:
How could the user groups be established, maintained, and marketed to
ensure ongoing use of SADA data sets?

### Rest of Africa

I have made contact with several academic librarians from Malawi,
Namibia, Zambia Zimbabwe, Ghana and Tanzania. I am in the process of
finding a link in Nairobi. The situation with regards to data archives
in Africa remains an idealistic one. This is the opinion of the African
professionals themselves. Dr Joe Uta of Malawi, a University Librarian
at the Mzuzu University of Malawi (e-mail mzuni@sdnp.org.mw), Dr I.K.
Antwi of the University for Development studies (e-mail:
udslib@libr.ug.edu.gh) in Ghana, and Jangawe Msuya of Tanzania (a
recent doctoral graduate of the University of the Western Cape),
indicated that they would be interested to further the IASSIST work in
their respective countries. However, e-mail and fax messages sometimes
fail to reach the recipients through bad telecommunication
infrastructure. Funding for technology is also a major issue. Many of
the individuals I have spoken to have great enthusiasm for data
archiving. However, financial resources remain a big problem for the
many poverty-stricken African countries. Training and development in the
understanding of data archiving and secondary analysis are also sorely
needed.

### How can IASSIST help?

Conditions creating barriers to establish data archiving infrastructure
are:

Financial resources; qualified staff; national information policies; and
base communication systems. I think IASSIST must do some serious
thinking about how we can be assisted to work around some of these
barriers.

My sense is that collaboration with the IFLA-Africa section might be
able to assist a great deal in asking the professionals in Africa to
audit their needs more specifically so that we could have a better idea
of the real circumstances facing us. We also have a cooperative
opportunity through the Standing Conference of Eastern, Central and
Southern African Librarians (SCECSAL). Dr Uta is a full member of this
Conference and I had some discussion with him with regards to marketing
data archiving and IASSIST to the African membership. Due to a lack of
funding, I could not attend their recent conference held in April in
Namibia.

Personally it has been very difficult for me to develop enthusiasm for
IASSIST here in South Africa and elsewhere.

Continuation of assistance by SADA (the SADA infrastructure and network
of contacts) is under consideration. This is to be understood given the
fluidity of the situation at the NRF and given new priority setting by
SADA.

My current employer supports my IASSIST secretarial function and is in a
position to make limited funding available for me to attend conferences
and seminar.

It would be a great help if I can attend more IASSIST conferences and
have an IASSIST mentor to soundboard with. There is a great gap between
the first world and that of the Developing Countries where data
archiving and access is concerned. I need closer contact with the
IASSIST Executive members and especially now that Bridget Winstanley has
retired. Repke de Vries also served as a valuable contact to us and kept
us informed about what was happening in Europe. He assisted us here in
South Africa to stay enthusiastic and abreast of developments in
IASSIST.

I would like to request that the IASSIST Executive Committee discuss the
situation in the South African Secretariat and assist me in finding a
way to get some of the mentioned persons on board to actively pursue the
interests of IASSIST.

We need to find how many other African researchers and academic
librarians know about the existence of data archiving and IASSIST.
Whether secondary analysis is considered when doctoral research is
pursued. We should also find a way of making them aware of the SADA
collection to introduce them to secondary analysis and access to
archival data on their doorstep.

Some comment and feedback on the ideas and information given would be
welcomed.

Thank you.

22.05.2000
