+++
nid = "1090"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2008-2009: Europe"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2008-2009-europe"
date = "2010-11-29 03:50:13 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
IASSIST Regional Report 2008-2009
European Region
Mari Kleemola
Finnish Social Science Data Archive
June 12, 2009

[Cross European Collaborations](#cross_european_collaborations) |
[National Reports](#national_reports)

This report begins with some observations on cross-national
collaborations, after which will be country-by-country reports of
national/institutional/individual activities.

[]{#cross_european_collaborations}

### Cross European Collaborations

[CESSDA and CESSDA PPP](#cessda) | [ESS](#ess) | [EDAN](#edan) |
[Bremen Workshop](#bremen) | [DDI Training at Dagstuhl](#ddi) |
[Other](#other)

[]{#cessda}

**CESSDA and CESSDA PPP**

The two-year CESSDA PPP, [Preparatory Phase Project for a Major Upgrade
of the Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA)
Research Infrastructure](http://www.nsd.uib.no/cessda/ppp/about/), is in
one of its busiest working periods. Much has been achieved since the
project began in January 2008. Details of the project's many activities
can be found on the [CESSDA PPP](http://www.cessda.org/) website.

CESSDA [Expert Seminar](http://samfund.dda.dk/expertseminar2008/) was
held in Odense, Denmark. In the seminar, European data archiving
professionals exchanged views on good practices in producing metadata,
an issue where data archives have plenty in common. Metadata and
application development requires and accumulates experience worth
sharing with others.

In December 2008, CESSDA, EUROSTAT and ONS held a joint workshop thats
ought ways to improve availability of microdata collected for
statistical purposes. Details of the event, including workshop
presentations, are available from the [EUROSTAT
website](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/research_methodology/worshop_december_2008).

[]{#ess}

**European Social Survey (ESS)**

The European Social Survey ([ESS](http://www.europeansocialsurvey.org/))
is an academically-driven social survey designed to chart and explain
the interaction between Europe's changing institutions and the
attitudes, beliefs and behaviour patterns of its diverse populations.
The survey covers over 25 European nations and employs rigorous
methodology. Round 4 fieldwork was completed in December 2008, and the
data will be released in September 2009. Edition 1.0 of the cumulative
data file for the first three rounds of the ESS was released in October
2008 and is freely available from the [NSD/ESS
website](http://ess.nsd.uib.no/index.jsp).

[]{#edan}

**East European Data Archive Network
([EDAN](http://www.gesis.org/en/cooperation/data_service/eastern_europe/index.htm))**

*Brigitte Hausstein writes:*

In 2008 several data archiving organisations from Central and Eastern
Europe became associated partners of the ongoing CESSDA PPP. The
strategic work on widening the CESSDA ERI includes the collaboration
with representatives from the following organisations: the Slovakian
Data Archive (SASD), the Polish Data Archive (ADS), the Lithuanian Data
Archive (LiDA), the Latvian Data Archive (LSZDA) and Russian Data
Archive (RSDA) as well as from data archive initiatives in Bulgaria,
Croatia, Ukraine, Macedonia, and Belarus. In order to collect country
specific information and to discuss the needs and expectations regarding
the future CESSDA ERI a workshop with potential new members was
organised. Additionally, onsite visits in the countries were carried out
to meet with national stakeholders of social science research and
funding organisations. The collected information will contribute to the
strategic and operational plan to widen the existing CESSDA ERI.

[]{#bremen}

**Bremen Workshop, April 2009**

*Libby Bishop writes:*

Bremen Workshop: Qualitative Longitudinal Research and Qualitative
Resources in Europe: Mapping the Field and Exploring Strategies for
Development

This one-day international workshop brought together researchers and
archivists with an interest in the re-use of qualitative data, and in
the development of qualitative longitudinal research and data resources
across Europe. The workshop was organized as a collaborative venture
between the UK Data Archive, the Timescapes Qualitative Longitudinal
Study and Archive, and the Bremen Life Course Archive, with support from
the Council for European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA). Fourteen
countries were represented at the event.

The participants agreed to form a network and to take forward key
initiatives around qualitative data sharing. Immediate tasks are to
publish (tentatively in IASSIST Quarterly IQ) the reports prepared on
each country on the state of qualitative archiving including inventories
of qualitative longitudinal resources. There is also agreement to
collaborate in seeking funding for subsequent meetings, exchange
programmes, workshops on setting up an archive, and other activities.

[]{#ddi}

**DDI Training at Schloss Dagstuhl**

DDI 3.0 training, sponsored by German Social Science Infrastructure
Services, Centre for Survey Research and Methodology (GESIS-ZUMA), was
offered at Schloss Dagstuhl, Leibniz Center for Informatics, in November
2008. The workshop brought together staff from various (mainly European)
archives and data producing agencies. The multi-day structure of the
workshop provides participants with an opportunity for in-depth
assistance on the specialized features of DDI that are important to
their organizations' activities.

DDI training will be offered again at Dagstuhl in October 2009, and the
first European DDI User Group meeting (EDDI 09) will take place in
December in Bonn.

[]{#other}

**Other Networks**

During the last years, several professional networks that engage in
collaborative projects on issues such as data sharing and metadata, have
emerged. European projects and networks in this field are, for example;
the following:

-   [Alliance for Permanent
    Access](http://www.alliancepermanentaccess.eu/)
-   [DSA, Data Seal of Approval](http://www.datasealofapproval.org/)
-   [INSPIRE, Infrastructure for Spatial Information in
    Europe](http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/)
-   [Digital Preservation Europe
    (DPE)](http://www.digitalpreservationeurope.eu/)

[]{#national_reports}

### National Reports

[Denmark](#denmark) | [Finland](#finland) | [France](#france) |
[Norway](#norway) [Slovenia](#slovenia) | [Sweden](#sweden) | [United
Kingdom](#uk)

[]{#denmark}

**Denmark**

(Reported by Anne Sofie Fink Kjeldgaard)

In 2008 DDA introduced two new facilities for finding studies in our
holdings. Apart from the 'traditional' search catalogue the users can
search for studies and/or questions in our Question Database. The users
can search for phrases or wordings in questions and from the query
result make instant comparisons or go directly to the full question text
and response categories. The other new feature is to find a data
material by looking at its topic. DDA has mapped all the studies
according to the Cessda topic classifications. In this way it is
possible to find the holdings related to the wanted topic. Both of these
new facilities will be supplied with new search features in 2009.

In October 2008 a seminar with the title "Data Preservation and Data
sharing: Regulations, practices and recommendations" was arranged. At
the seminar 35 Danish and international researchers had the opportunity
to meet and discuss best practices for archiving and data sharing.

2008 was also the year were a external panel evaluated the results and
methods of the DDA Health unit. As a bottom line conclusion the
evaluation group endorsed a carefully monitored continuation of the
activities for another five year period including a renewed evaluation.
The full evaluation report can be read at www.sundhed.dda.dk

In January 2009 senior researcher Hans Jørgen Marker could look back on
his 25 years of employment in DDA. The day was celebrated in DDA at a
pleasant reception with Hans Jørgens' colleagues, family, friends and
business relations.

During 2008/9 DDA has been working on developing an editor for the DDI
standard based on the Eclipse Rich Client Platform with a default back
end backed by the Oracle Berkley XML database. The project is based on
two modules: a back end responsible for handling, query and CRUD
operations of DDI and a front end providing the user interface. The back
end is capable of handling other storage types such as relational
databases or XML querying APIs. The front end and the back end are both
pluggable through the Eclipse RCP. The development work is carried out
as a contribution to the DDI Tools Project.

[]{#finland}

**Finland**

For the [Finnish Social Science Data
Archive](http://www.fsd.uta.fi/english/) (FSD), the year was succesful.
The number of data access applications grew, as well as the number of
archived studies, and FSD participates actively in the data collection
of some international survey series such as ISSP, CSES, and WVS/EVS.

FSD has put in a lot of effort and time to promote awareness of research
ethics related to research data and data management in the Finnish
academic community. As a result, FSD staff have lectured and consulted
on these issues, as well as participated in establishing a new kind of
research culture in Finland, sensitive to data security, data sharing
and preservation. Starting this year, the Academy of Finland requires
researchers applying for funding to submit a data management plan as
part of the research plan appended to the funding application, and
recommends depositing social science data in the Finnish Social Science
Data Archive.

In addition, three open access web resources developed by FSD have
become important sources to social science research and teaching. 1)
Research methods Web resource (MOTV) is widely utilized in research
methods courses and students' self-directed learning in universities.
2) The research ethics web resource supports FSD's work on promotion of
sensitiveness to data security and data sharing. It offers information
on the rights of research participants and how researchers should inform
participants. Parts of this resource are also available in English:
http://www.fsd.uta.fi/english/other_services.html. 3) The Party
Manifesto Database (POHTIVA) includes over 800 manifestos from 57
political parties from the years 1880-2008. (Pohtiva is available in
Finnish and partly in Swedish.)

Recently FSD was listed among the 24 research infrastructures at the
national level in Finland by the Steering Group of the first Finnish
road map project (Report in English
http://www.tsv.fi/tik/laaja_englanti_PDF.pdf). FSD is also represented
in the project of developing Finnish national digital library and
continues to actively co-operate with several national units (like
Statistics Finland, National Advisory Board on Ethics, and Finnish
Information Centre for Register Research). FSD is also a partner in the
CESSDA PPP.

[]{#france}

**France**

(Reported by Benoit Tudoux)

The French roadmap of research infrastructures has been published. It
includes 4 infrastructures for humanities and social sciences. PROGEDO
project will cover Data archives ie Réseau Quetelet for France and
support to CESSDA as ERI, remote access, longitudinal surveys and
international surveys including ESS and SHARE.

Réseau Quetelet and its partners (ADISP, CDSP and INED) are currently
involved in the CESSDA PPP, especially leading the WP10. In this
perspective Quetelet has purchased NESSTAR for all partners. ADISP and
INED will begin use NESSTAR while CDSP will extend its use.

The new Quetelet portal will soon open with new functionalities allowing
on line registeration for users. Cooperation with the National
Statistical Office INSEE for remote access pilot is going on and will be
developed.

Partners of Quetelet are also involved in major European and
international surveys. ADISP is in charge of the French survey of the
ISSP programme. Members of CDSP are part of the French team in charge of
the European social survey and have actively participated in the 4th
round of this survey. INED is still pursuing work on old datasets to
disseminate them (more than 200 surveys held). It is also involved in
the Generation and Gender Program for which NESSTAR will be used for
access.

ADISP is in charge of the dissemination of Eurostat datasets (LFS, ad
hoc modules, ECHP, SILC) for all European research institutions members
of the European network EQUALSOC.

A second University Platform of Data have been created in Lyon. It is
designed to help in data processing researchers, and PhD or Master
students from universities and research units of Lyon.

[]{#norway}

**Norway**

(Reported by Atle Alvheim)

New interesting Norwegian projects include, among others, the following
two:

[Eurosphere](http://www.eurosphere.uib.no/): This is an EU-financed
project whose object is to identify new types of public spheres that
promotes political involvement of European citizens. The project
involves 17 partners in 16 countries. NSD is developing and administring
the Eurosphere Knowledge base, which differs from most data portals in
that the data to a large extent will be qualitative in nature and
consist of interviews with leading political and administrative
personnell.

[MacroDataGuide](http://www.nsd.uib.no/macrodataguide/): The
availability of macrodata has increased greatly in recent years.
However, locating such data sources present a challenge. To assist
researchers in their hunt for good international macrodata NSD has
launched the MacroDataGuide. The service provides overviews, quality
evaluations, useful links, metadata, descriptions of functionality, etc.
NSD updates the guide regularly.

[]{#slovenia}

**Slovenia**

(Reported by Janez Stebe)

Arhiv Druzboslovnih Podatkov, Univerza v Ljubljani (ADP) has had a
succesful year. Number of datasets is approaching 600, and number
registered users 200. Funding for ADP was secured for period 2009-2014
on a research infrastructure call, and new series of seminars for users
on data and statistical literacy topics introduced in 2008. ADP is also
active in CESSDA PPP project.

[]{#sweden}

**Sweden**

(Reported by Iris Alfredsson)

In 2007 the Swedish Research Council decided that a new organization,
the Swedish National Data Service (SND) should replace the Swedish
Social Science Data Service (SSD) and extend its scope to cover social
sciences, medicine, and the humanities. The new organization formally
started 1 January 2008. However, SSD performed the operational tasks
during the first six months of 2008. In January SSD/SND moved into new
premises in the Gegerfeltska villa in the center of Gothenburg. SND
became administratively located under the faculty of education, while
SSD earlier was located under the faculty of social sciences.The SND
board met for the first time in April 2008. The board consists of five
researchers from the fields of social sciences, humanities and medicine.
Most of the SSD staff was transferred to the new organization 1 July
2008. At the same time SSD was closed down, and the SSD data collection
and equipment were taken over by SND. A director was appointed, and took
office 1 September. A strategic plan for 2008-2012 was drawn up and
presented for the Research Council in October. During the autumn the new
organisation was presented at several conferences and workshops. At the
end of the year a scientific council was formed. The council consists of
fifteen people representing different areas, both nationally and
internationally. Due to illness the newly appointed director had to
leave her position at the end of the year.

During the year the Swedish Research Council launched the SIMSAM
initiative. The purpose is to stimulate a new generation of researchers
and research leaders within disciplines that can make the best use of
the data on Swedish registers. A number of research groups received
contributions, where the aim should be to produce world-class research
within all disciplines where the data on population-based registers is
an important source for research. The initiative is expected to lead to
improved and expanded use of registers in research and expansion of
knowledge of how research with registers is organised inside Sweden and
internationally. Each research group working with registers should be
given an independent and strong position within its host university or
university college. Each group will be expected to commence undertaking
new, register-based research that produces synergetic effects outside
its own environment.

At the end of 2008 it was decided that SMHI, the Swedish Meteorological
and Hydrological Institute would host a new organisation focused on
climate and environmental data, SND climate/environment.

[]{#uk}

**United Kingdom**

*Robin Rice writes:*

The DISC-UK DataShare project (2007-2009), led by EDINA and the
Edinburgh University Data Library, with partners at the Universities of
Southampton and Oxford, has advanced the current provision of repository
services for accommodating datasets in the UK. With three institutions
taking part, a range of exemplars has emerged from the establishment of
institutional data repositories and related services based on open
source platforms. The approach took a major turn midway through when an
apparent solution to the problem of lack of voluntary deposits arose, in
the form of the Data Audit Framework. Briefing papers, conference
presentations, posters, the blog and website (www.disc-uk.org) drew
attention to key themes including data publishing, open data and
licensing issues, data management, scientific metadata, policy
development, disciplinary differences and country comparisons. Key
conclusions: 1) Data management motivation is a better bottom-up driver
for researchers than data sharing but is not sufficient to create
culture change, 2) Data librarians, data managers and data scientists
can help bridge communication between repository managers & researchers,
3) institutional repositories can improve impact of sharing data over
the internet.
