+++
nid = "1702"
uid = "22"
author = "t.alatera"
title = "Regional Report 2000-2001: United States"
oldpath = "/about/regional-report-2000-2001-united-states"
date = "2011-04-19 07:58:50 -0700"
draft = "false"
+++
US IASSIST Regional Secretary's Report,
May 17, 2001

- [Publications by US IASSISTers](#iassisters)
- [Other publications](#other)
- [Individual activities and news](#activities)
- [Appendix](#news)

[]{#iassisters}Publications (not including the IQ) by US IASSISTers
-------------------------------------------------------------------

*Encyclopedia of the U.S. Census*, Margo J. Anderson, Editor in Chief
(Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2000). IASSIST (past and present) was well
represented among the contributors to this volume. Among them, with
their respective articles:

-   **Albert F. Anderson and Lisa J. Neidert** on, "Dissemination of
    data: electronic products;"
-   **Patricia C. Becker** on, "Enumeration: field procedures,"
    "Housing," "1970 census," "1980 census," and "Tabulation
    geography;"
-   **Constance F. Citro** on, "Advisory committees," "Content,"
    "Content detrmination," "Coverage improvement procedures,"
    "Editing and imputation," "Enumeration: special populations,"
    "Federal agency uses of census data," "Income and poverty
    measures," "Long form," "Population estimates and projections,"
    "Related data sources," "Sampling for content," and "Sampling
    in the census." Connie was also a co-editor of the volume.
-   **Pat Doyle** on, "Federal household surveys;"
-   **Deirdre Gaquin** on, "Data dissemination and use," and "Summary
    Tape Files;"
-   **Ann Gray** on, "Dissemination of data: secondary products;"
-   **Judith Rowe** on, "Data products: evolution;" and
-   **Steven Ruggles** on, "IPUMS (Integrated Public Use Microdata
    Series)."
-   **Margaret O. Adams** prepared the entry on "National Archives and
    Records Administration (NARA)," on the basis of contributions from
    a number of NARA colleagues, including IASSISTer, **Thomas E.
    Brown**.

*Of Significance* is a new "topical journal" of the Association of
Public Data Users (APDU), whose general editor is IASSISTer, **Deirdre
Gaquin**. IASSIST members have been frequent contributors to this
publication. For example:

-   Volume 1:1 (June 1999) on *Statistical Literacy* was guest-edited by
    **Wendy Treadwell** and included an "Introduction to Statistical
    Literacy" by **Wendy Treadwell** (pp. 5-8); an article on
    "Archivists and Statistical Literacy," for which **Tom Southerly**
    was co-author (with Linda Henry) (pp. 31-34); and "Statistical
    Literacy: A Selected Annotated Bibliography" by **Jocelyn Tipton**
    (pp. 57-xx).

<!-- -->

-   Volume 1:2 (December 1999), guest-editor Janie Harris, represented
    the proceedings from the 1999 APDU annual conference. Presenters at
    the conference (and authors represented in this issue) included
    IASSISTers **Lisa Neidert** (with Stephen Dienstfrey), program
    chairs, on "Introduction to APDU99: Responsible Data Use" (pp.
    1-2); **Wendy Treadwell** (APDU president) with opening remarks on
    "Responsible Data Use: Protecting the Future of Public Data" (p.
    3); **Judith Rowe** on "Reflecting on the Past and Looking to the
    Future" (pp. 10-13); **Wendy Treadwell** (with Katherine Wallman,
    Marianne Zawitz, and Colleen Blessing) on "Making Things Add Up for
    the End User: Issues in Statistical Literacy" (pp. 14-16);
    **Patrick Collins** and **Lisa Broniszewski** (with Alvan Zarate) on
    "Respondent Disclosure in Surveys: Issues and Solutions" (p. 24);
    **Albert Anderson** who led a Roundtable Session on "Getting to
    Know Your Data with PDQ Explore" (p. 34); **Patricia C. Becker**
    (with Joseph J. Salvo) on "Post-Mortem Report: Address Review"
    (pp. 38-39); **Ann Green, Wendy Treadwell,** and **Peter Joftis** on
    "Metadata on Steroids" (pp. 40-41); **Ann Green** (with **Cavan
    Capps** and Mark Wallace) on "The Vision of Integrated Access to
    Statistics: the Data Web" (pp. 42-47); and **Patricia C. Becker**
    (with Joseph J. Salvo) on "Electronic Products for Census 2000"
    (p. 48).
    
-   Volume 2:1 (June 2000) on *Confidentiality* was guest-edited by
    IASSISTer **Pat Doyle** (with Gerald Gates and Laura Zayatz) and
    included an article by IASSISTer **Steven Ruggles**, "Foreward---A
    Data User's Perspective on Confidentiality" (pp. 1-5).

<!-- -->

-   Volume 2:2 (December 2000), on *Preservation of Public Data* and
    guest-edited by Theodore J. Hull included a number of contributions
    by IASSISTers. Among them were **Judith Rowe**, "Foreward---A Data
    User's Perspective on Preservation" (pp. 1-3); **Janet Vavra** on
    "Preservation: Maintaining Information for the Future" (pp.
    28-33); and, **Wendy L. Treadwell** (with **William C. Block**) on
    "Preserving and Enhancing Functional Access: The Development of a
    Generalized Resource Extraction Tool for Aggregate Data (GRETA) at
    the University of Minnesota" (pp. 39-42).

<!-- -->

-   Volume 3:1 (June 2001) on "Effects of Changing Data Products," is
    being guest-edited by IASSISTer **Ilona Einowski** (with Amy West).

*Social Science Review* , published in the US, likewise carried articles
authored by IASSISTers. For example:

-   Summer 2001, v 19 n 2, includes: "The Social Science Dream Machine:
    Resource Recovery, Analysis," by **Jostein Ryssevik** and **Simon
    Musgrave.**

[]{#others}Other Publications by US Members
-------------------------------------------

**Adams, Margaret O.** and **Thomas E. Brown**. 2000. "Myths and
Realities about the 1960 Census," Prologue: Quarterly of the National
Archives and Records Administration. 32:4 (Winter), pp. 266-270.
Available online via the NARA homepage
<http://www.nara.gov/publications/prologue/gene1960.html>. Based upon an
earlier version that originally appeared in the Association of Public
Data Users' APDU NEWSLETTER, 22: September 1997, pp. 8-9, 16.

**Anderson, A.F.** 1997. "Application of high-performance computing to
the management of social science and demographic data." Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers. 29:1 pp 86-98.

**Green, Ann, JoAnn Dionne**, and Martin Dennis (1999). Preserving the
Whole: A Two-Track Approach to Rescuing Social Science Data and
Metadata. Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information Resources
(June).

[]{#activities}US Members' Individual Outreach or Related Professional Activities, and Institutional/Organizational News
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Albert Anderson** retired from the Population Studies Center at the
University of Michigan in 1996 and continues to work with Public Data
Queries, Inc (PDQ). PDQ has focused on the development of data
management and analysis applications based on high performance, parallel
computing systems. The work to date has been supported in large part by
small business grants from the National Institute for Child Health and
Human Development (NICHD) and the National Institute on Aging (NIA) of
the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH). While work on four
projects is winding down, four new projects are now underway and others
planned.

The early projects included the development of PDQ-Explore, a system
capable of supporting interactive access to large census and survey data
sets, along with an evaluation of hardware platforms and the development
of user support materials. New projects are directed toward resampling,
expert systems, the manipulation of data across data sets, and
"living" electronic research reports. See: <http://www.pdq.com>.

**Lisa Neidert** and **Al Anderson** also presented a poster, "Public
use census data and confidentiality: Is there a problem?," at the 2001
meeting of the Population Association of America (PAA). Anderson has
participated with William Frey in workshops on the use of census data in
the classroom. These workshops have been held in conjunction with PAA
and American Sociological Association (ASA) meetings for several years,
including 2000 and 2001.

**Ilona Einowski** has been involved in several professional ventures.
They include: 1) COUNTING CALIFORNIA about which she reports that she
has been working on a web based data delivery system called COUNTING
CALIFORNIA <http://countingcalifornia.cdlib.org>. The prototype is
currently available and we are getting ready for the second version
release on May 15 (2001). One of the most interesting aspects of the
project is that we are relying on the DDI DTD to create metadata in XML
for the files. It has been a most interesting project in that it has
given me a chance to truly "road test" the DDI and expand my XML
skills. Ilona reported that she did a presentation on the project at the
APDU conference last fall (2000) which was well received.

Ilona was also appointed to the ICPSR CENSUS 2000 ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
The Committee's charge was to advise ICPSR on the acquisition of data
from Census 2000. The Committee met for the first time in May 2000 and
after a very fruitful discussion, endorsed a set of activities revolving
around acquiring, processing, preserving and enhancing 2000 Census files
obtained from the Census Bureau.

Ilona also helped create the charge for the UC Berkeley Electronic Data
Task Force. The Task Force is charged with assessing Berkeley's needs
in the area of electronic data and proposing a set of principals and an
initial set of specific actions to guide the campus. The Task Force will
concentrate on five main issues: Acquisition, Funding, Access,
Archiving, and Support. Ilona was appointed leader of the Inventory Work
Group, which at the time she submitted her report was in the process of
gathering information on the holdings of the various campus departments
and individual researchers with the intention of assessing the scope of
the "duplication of efforts" factor.

With IASSISTers **Libbie Stephenson** and **Marty Pawlocki** at UCLA,
Ilona presented a one and a half day workshop on data services (April
26-27, 2001) sponsored by the UCLA Institute for Labor and Employment
(ILE). Part of the mandate of the UCLA ILE is to support and promote
labor and employment research that relies on micro-level survey, public
use and administrative data. This workshop - ILE Data Services: Needs
and Strategies for the University, Labor and Community - brought
together university, labor and community researchers to discuss the
current situation, assess the various group research needs and make
recommendations to the ILE on collection development, archiving and
support for research.

**Ann Gray** moved from Cornell to Princeton in June, 2000, as **Judith
Rowe** retired at Princeton in 2000. In December 2000, Ann was awarded a
grant from the Pew Charitable Trust to establish a topically-focussed
data archive on public policy and the arts. The grant has the Princeton
University Library collaborating with the Center for Arts and Cultural
Policy Studies of Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and
International Affairs, and the partners will create a fully searchable,
digital archive containing policy-relevant information on arts and
culture. The archive is intended for nonacademic as well as academic
use. The archive will have four components: online storage, information
retrieval, selective data access and downloading capabilities. See
<http://www.pewtrusts.com/Frame.cfm?Framesource=programs/cul/culindex.cfm>

**Carolyn Geda** chaired a session at the annual Society of American
Archivists meeting in August 2000 in Pittsburgh, which focussed on the
30-year history of the electronic records program at the U.S. National
Archives. For the session Carolyn chaired, IASSISTer **Thomas E. Brown**
presented a paper surveying the history of the NARA electronic records
program, and former directors of the program reminisced and commented on
their experiences. In a companion session, IASSISTer **Peggy Adams**
presented a paper on the evolution of reference services for electronic
records at the U.S. National Archives over its 30 years, and her NARA
colleagues Linda Henry and Bruce Ambacher spoke on the 30-year
experience of accessioning and preservation of electronic records at
NARA, respectively. Former member of the NARA electronic records staff,
and former IASSISTer Fynnette L. Eaton chaired this second historical
overview session at the SAA 2000.

**Ann Janda** reported that Northwestern University and the University
of Chicago co-hosted the IASSIST 2000 conference on Northwestern's
campus in Evanston, Illinois, June 2000. Local conference organizers
were **Fay Booker** (UC) and **Ann Janda** (NU) with **Diane Geraci**
(SUNY- Binghamton) as Program Chair. The conference theme was "Data in
the Digital Library: Charting the Future for Social, Spatial and
Government Data Services." As the "best conference ever" in IASSIST
parlance, it brought together about 160 data and library professionals
from the U.S. and abroad, including distinguished guests such as Kenneth
Prewitt, Director of the Bureau of Census and Daniel Greenstein,
Director of the Digital Library Federation. Strong attendance by local
library staff and administrators meant firsthand exposure to data issues
and activities. Ann wrote that she felt that the goals of the conference
theme were accomplished. She also reported that during the Fall quarter
of academic year 2000-2001, Northwestern volunteered to be one of seven
beta-testers for ICPSR's experiment in allowing people at ICPSR-member
institutions to download data directly from ICPSR's website to the
user's desktop. Over time, it will be interesting to see the effects of
this new service on operations and on user needs -- particularly on
local central storage, services needed by inexperienced vs seasoned
researchers, and on maintaining records of local holdings. As noted by
the ICPSR, the new service represents a quantum leap in data
distribution, and writes Ann, "it's a welcome one."

**Robert Johnston** reported that on March 8, 2000, data experts from
Princeton, Binghamton, Yale, Columbia, University of Toronto, University
of Guelph, as well as Edward Spar of the (U.S.) Committee on
Professional Associations for Federal Statistics (COPAFS) traveled to
United Nations Headquarters in New York for a one-day evaluation and
beta testing of three electronic data products prepared by the
Statistics Division. These products were the *Statistical Yearbook* on
CD-ROM, Monthly Bulletin of Statistics On-line and the UN Common
Database for Internet. The evaluators took their assignment seriously
and there was lively discussion and some back-and-forth with the
developers and with the group leader at the end of the day. Substantial
additional work was undertaken on the Common Database in particular in
response to the comments and discussions. The result was released for
public subscription on Internet in March (2001),
<http://www.unstats.un.org>. Robert concluded his report by sending
thanks to IASSISTers **Diane Geraci,** **Ann Green**, **Greg Haley**,
**Laine Ruus**, **Ed Spar, Jocelyn Tipton,** **Bo Wandschneider**, who
were among those who provided the UN with the benefit of their
collective experience.

**Julie Linden** collaborated with **Ann Green** for the report from
Yale; they noted that in September 2000, Julie was appointed to the
position of Data & Electronic Services Librarian at the Social Science
Libraries & Information Services, Yale University. Julie, Ann, and
Steven Citron-Pousty of the Social Science Statistical Laboratory are
working to migrate Yale's Social Science Data Archive web-based catalog
from a mainframe-legacy format to a DDI-compliant SQL database. The new
catalog, to be called StatCat, will provide more direct access to
numeric data at Yale and beyond, regardless of media. The URL for the
Social Science Libraries and Information Services is
<http://www.library.yale.edu/socsci>, the URL for the Social Science
Data Archive is <http://statlab.stat.yale.edu/SSDA/ssda.html>.

Julie also reported that New Haven Health, originally funded through a
grant from the National Library of Medicine is a publicly accessible web
site that provides information about the past and present health of the
greater New Haven, Connecticut community. This project is a repository
of numerical and statistical health data, electronic publications, and
photographs, a guide to local public health resources, and a forum for
local public health researchers. The site includes dozens of historical
documents, health surveys, consumer health publications, and six years
of New Haven Health Department annual reports and vital statistics.
Their website is <http://info.med.yale.edu/newhavenhealth/>. Yale also
has worked closely and successfully with Luna Imaging, Inc. in the
development of classroom applications and in the creation of an image
database currently containing material from the Imaging America Project,
the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, and the Yale Visual
Resources Collection (6000 records in all). For further information, see
<http://www.library.yale.edu/pubstation/databases/luna.htm>. Finally,
the Yale University Library and Elsevier Science are working together on
a year-long planning process for the creation of a digital archive for
the 1,100 journals published electronically by Elsevier Science. The
project will investigate the uses a digital archive supports and the
extent to which it is possible to differentiate between content -- the
long-term integrity of which must be preserved -- and the options for
rendering and using that content. Various formats for encoding digital
content will be studied to determine which are likely to remain
relatively stable over time and to be good anchors for preservation.
Project planners will establish an infrastructure for processing digital
objects selected for the archive. The one-year planning work is
supported by a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

**Ron Nakao** reported that in June, 2000, Paul Zarins was appointed the
Digital Library Program Officer for the Stanford University Libraries.

**Sharon Neary** let us know that she would be leaving the University of
Calgary in the summer, 2001 to assume the position of Data Librarian at
the University of Notre Dame.

**Lisa Neidert** continued to be on the Board of Directors of
Association of Public Data Users (APDU) as Treasurer and continued to be
on APDU's Census 2000 Product Review group. This also included
attendance in the "Census 2000 Users' Conference on Public Use
Microdata Sample (PUMS) Files." In both of these roles, I am providing
input to the Census Bureau on the content and format of public-use data
products. While I didn't necessarily like some of the P.L. 94-171
product release (3 parts and minimal technical documentation), note that
one of the choices was ASCII. (See entry for Anderson, for reference to
the PAA poster session presented jointly by Neidert and Anderson.)

**Thomas M. Parris** let us know that he is no longer at Harvard, and
that his new position is Research Scientist & Executive Director, Boston
Office, ISCIENCES, LLC, 685 Centre Street, Suite 207,Jamaica Plain, MA
02130; <parris@isciences.com>; <http://www.isciences.com/> and
<http://www.terraviva.net/>.

**Tom Piazza** wrote on behalf of himself and **Merrill Shanks** to tell
us that they were awarded the AAPOR 2000 Innovators Award in May 2000 by
the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) as
respectively, head of the General Social Survey and author of the SDA
Web site, for providing online data documentation and analysis
capabilities. The ICPSR Web site also shared the AAPOR award. In
September 2000 the American Political Science Association (APSA)
presented SDA with their 2000 "Best Instructional Software Award" at
their annual meeting in Washington D.C. The SDA Web site is at:
<http://sda.berkeley.edu>.

**Wendy (Treadwell) Thomas** reported that she had been appointed Data
Archivist at the Minnesota Population Center at the University of
Minnesota where she would be working with the IPUMS, International
IPUMS, and the new NHGIS (National Historical Geographic Information
System).

**Tess Trost** noted that in March 2001, the Board of Regents of Texas
Tech University approved a promotion for her and that starting September
2001, she would assume the moniker of Librarian, noting that she has
been one for over 25 years! In addition to her Data Library duties, Tess
is also the Patent Librarian for Texas Tech and in that capacity she had
applied for and received a Big 12 Faculty Fellowship grant to visit a
patent library at another university which she will use to visit two
patent libraries. (Tess adds that the Big 12 is the Athletic Conference
to which Texas Tech belongs.)

**Patrick M. Yott,** at the time he submitted his 2001 report to
IASSIST, told us that he had been appointed Director, Digital Services
Integration, University of Virginia Library. In the year or so
preceding, he had taught ARL (Association for Research Libraries)
workshops on Interactive Data Websites; had been participating on the
DDI (Data Documentation Initiative) committee and was working on
developing xml/xsl instances for DDI objects; had designed XML
appliances for library functions; and had participated in DLF (Digital
Library Federation) Registry Planning.

In November 2000, the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
and the University of Maryland co-sponsored a one-day conference called,
"Digital Strategies -- 2000." IASSISTer **Peggy Adams** was on the
program committee for the conference and chaired a panel discussion on
"Digital Data" on which IASSISTer **Cavan Capps** of the U.S. Bureau
of the Census participated. Attendees came from throughout the eastern
U.S. and included IASSISTer **Ann Green** of Yale University.

In October 2000, IASSISTers attending the annual Association of Public
Data Users (APDU) meeting came together for an informal IASSIST U.S.
regional meeting. Ann Gray prepared a summary of the discussion and her
report is attached as an appendix to this report.

Respectfully,

Margaret O. Adams, U.S. Regional Secretary

[]{#appendix}Appendix to US IASSIST 2001 Regional Secretary's Report
--------------------------------------------------------------------

**October 23, 2000
Arlington, Va.**

### Informal meeting of IASSIST members at APDU Annual Conference

Attending:
- Ann Gray
- Albert Anderson
- Patty Becker
- Ilona Einowski
- Tom Brown
- Pat Doyle
- Peggy Adams
- Jocelyn Tipton
- Jack Solock
- Judith Rowe
- Steven McClaskie
- Cheryl Stadel-Bevins
- Wendy Treadwell
- Lisa Neidert

Peggy Adams, US Regional Secretary, queried the group about the USA
Regional Report, in particular, what should go into the USAReport. Tom
Brown stated that the USA report should include the contributions of
individual USA members, such as publications, and other activities. This
was expanded to include workshops, papers given at conferences, etc. The
existing form (on the IASSIST web page) did not solicit a great deal of
self-reporting of activities. Peggy needs a list of USA members and a
new request for information needs to be sent. The report itself can be a
synthesis of activities, but it could also include a selection of issues
of importance to USA members.

Peggy raised a question regarding what IASSIST USA should be doing and
how IASSIST could address issues. IASSIST operates through Action
Groups. Should there be an "action group" on USA issues? Should
IASSIST USA act as a separate entity or should it share its discussions
with the entire membership? What type of "action" would the group
take?

Here followed a very loose discussion with much back-and-forth on
various aspects of the USA IASSIST issues. Tom volunteered to highlight
issues from COPAFS, it was suggested that the action group could seek
information from international members, but for what purpose was lost on
this note taker - could it have been to identify international issues or
gage the response of international members to the USA issues? Judith
liked the idea of having an informal bibliography of US member's
publications (see USA report above) and requested that when positions
(jobs) are posted to the IASSIST List, the institution report back to us
when it is filled and by whom. Jocelyn noted that it is important that
new members, or persons new to the profession, understand why issues are
important. The IASSIST Web site could be used to display and keep
information about the importance of issues, as well as to note the new
hires.

Those attending then turned to the question of if the discussion of
issues should be a USA only activity. It was the opinion of most, but
not all, that the Europeans are interested in USA issues. Wendy pointed
out that the USA federal structure is similar to that of the EU. Not all
USA members expressed an interest in European & Canadian issues, but
most did.

Wendy also informed us that the new IASSIST FY runs from June to June
and not from January to January, so the FY 2000 will be an 18 month FY.

The members of the action group were identified as being: Tom - COPAFS
news Patty - Census Bureau Issues Someone from Depository Library
Program.

The Action Group can serve to inform the members of issues that are
important in our lives and members can alert the group to new issues.
The Group can attempt to determine if there is a consensus among the
membership that some action is needed. If so, the US Secretary can
initiate such action. The formation of this group and its workings need
to be discussed with the IASSIST Admin Committee. While this Action
Group deals only with the US, Tom pointed out that if the Europeans or
Canadians wanted to have a similar group, they could do so. That is how
COPAFS was funded - with the understanding that if there was a similar
European association, IASSIST would fund it also. In any event, the
International perspective remains important.

The meeting was summed up as follows:

-   Action Group on Issues Mission: Inform members, respond to members
    concerns, collection information. Members of the group would
    represent various issue-intensive groups: COPAFS, Census, GODART,
    BRASS (Heather McMillian) and Legal (Copyright).
-   Tom will provide summary of COPAFS to the members. If a position is
    posted on IASSIST-L, we will be informed when the position is
    filled. The IASSIST Web page should include organizational profiles
    of other organizations, e.g. APDU, COPAFS, and some information on
    why issues are important. Peggy should report to the IASSIST Admin
    Committee regarding this new Action Group.

*Notes taken by Ann Gray.*
